Prospective evaluation of criteria for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in trauma patients.This study examined if use of clinical screening criteria for selective radiography of blunt trauma patients can identify all patients with thoracolumbar (TL) spine injuries. The study was a prospective cohort of patients undergoing TL spine radiographs following blunt trauma. Patients were considered at risk for TL spine injury if they had any of the following clinical criteria: 1) complaints of TL spine pain, 2) TL spine tenderness, 3) a decreased level of consciousness, 4) intoxication with ethanol or drugs, 5) a neurologic deficit, or 6) a painful distracting injury. Patients without any of these findings were considered at low risk for TL spine injury. Severity of mechanism of injury was also recorded. Data sheets were completed prior to TL radiography. Injury status was determined by the final faculty radiologist interpretation of all radiographic studies. A total of 2404 patients were enrolled. TL spine injuries were identified in 152 patients. Of these 152 patients with spine injuries, all 152 (100%, 95% confidence interval 98-100%) were considered high risk by having at least one of the high-risk criteria. These criteria have a specificity of 3.9%, a positive predictive value of 6.6%, and a negative predictive value of 100%. All of the high-risk criteria but intoxication with ethanol or drugs were important as sole predictors of TL spine injury. The use of high-risk clinical screening criteria identified virtually all blunt trauma patients with acute TL spine injuries. These criteria, however, have poor specificity and positive predictive value.Thoracolumbar fracture in blunt trauma patients: guidelines for diagnosis and imaging.The aim of the study was to determine a clinical diagnostic pathway for the imaging of the thoracolumbar spine in blunt trauma patients.A literature review was undertaken to determine the factors important in the detection of thoracolumbar injury and also to produce a trial protocol, which could be tested retrospectively. Two hundred patients admitted between 1998 and 2000 were reviewed retrospectively to form a database of the relevant clinical features. The diagnostic pathway protocol was tested retrospectively in two groups; one hundred with known thoracolumbar fractures and one hundred undifferentiated multi-trauma patients. Sensitivity and specificity indices were determined using the chi-squared test of association.Falls and motor vehicle crashes were the most common mechanism of injury causing thoracolumbar fractures. No significant association could be found between mechanism of injury (MOI) and presence of thoracolumbar fracture. Clinical signs found to be associated with thoracolumbar fracture include: (1) back pain/midline tenderness (Sens 62.1% Spec 91.5%), (2) palpable midline step (Sens 13.8% Spec 100%), (3) back bruising (Sens 6.9% Spec 98.6%), (4) abnormal neurological signs (Sens 41.4% Spec 95.8%). Cervical level fractures were also found to be associated with an increased incidence of thoracolumbar fractures. Factors found to influence the detection of back pain/midline tenderness include: (1) GCS<15, (2) ETOH/drug intoxication, (3) major distracting injury. The proposed diagnostic pathway would have led to 92% of patients receiving TL imaging in group 2 (multi-trauma) with a sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 11.3% and a negative predictive value of 100%.From the literature and the results of the study, we propose that imaging of the thoracolumbar spine is required in those patients suffering from a high force mechanism of injury if any of the following are present: (1) back pain/midline tenderness, (2) local signs of thoracolumbar injury, (3) abnormal neurological signs, (4) cervical spine fracture, (5) GCS<15, (6) major distracting injury, (7) ETOH/ drug intoxication. An evidence based diagnostic pathway has been shown to be highly sensitive in determining the presence of TL fracture in a retrospective study of blunt trauma patients.Indications for obtaining surveillance thoracic and lumbar spine radiographs.The purpose of this study was to identify risk factors for thoracic/lumbar spine fractures in patients with blunt injuries and subsequently establish indications for obtaining surveillance thoracolumbar radiographs. Retrospective review of all patients with blunt injuries (n = 1485) admitted in 1992 to a level I trauma center with a discharge diagnosis of thoracolumbar spine fracture established entrance criteria for a 4-month prospective study. Relative risk of fracture (RR) was calculated. Retrospective. Seventy-six percent (176 of 233) had radiographs; 21% had fractures; one diagnosed late. Prospective. One hundred percent (167 of 167) had radiographs; 9% (15 of 167) had fractures; none diagnosed late or missed. Forty percent (26 of 65) of patients with fractures had no pain or tenderness; 35% (9) required surgical spinal fixation. Our data define these indications for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in patients with blunt injuries: back pain (RR1), fall > or = 10 feet, ejection from motorcycle/motor vehicle crash > or = 50 mph, GCS score < or = 8, (all RR2), and neurologic deficit (RR10). The sensitivity of our surveillance radiography protocol has increased to 100%. The absence of back pain does not exclude significant thoracolumbar trauma.Selective indications for thoracic and lumbar radiography in blunt trauma.To determine indications for thoracolumbar radiography.Case series with prospective data collection.Level I trauma center.Blunt-trauma victims more than 12 years old who underwent routine thoracic and lumbar radiography according to institutional protocol. Patients were classified as group 1, not able to be evaluated clinically (Glasgow Coma Scale score of less than 13, intoxication, intubation, or cervical neurologic deficit); and group 2, able to be evaluated clinically.Twenty-four of 319 patients sustained 25 thoracic or lumbar fractures. Seven of 136 group 1 patients and 17 of 183 group 2 patients had fractures. Eight of 17 patients with pain and 9 of 17 with tenderness had fractures (P = .001). No group 2 patients without pain, tenderness, thoracic or lumbar neuro-deficit, or major distracting injury, including cervical fracture, had fractures. The negative predictive value of pain and tenderness was 95%. Five of 46 patients with spinal fractures at any level had multiple fractures.Blunt-trauma victims who cannot be evaluated clinically should undergo thoracolumbar radiography. Routine radiography may be unnecessary in asymptomatic patients who can be evaluated clinically and who do not have neurologic deficits or distracting injuries. Spinal fracture at any level mandates complete spinal radiography.Thoracolumbar fracture in blunt trauma patients: guidelines for diagnosis and imaging.The aim of the study was to determine a clinical diagnostic pathway for the imaging of the thoracolumbar spine in blunt trauma patients.A literature review was undertaken to determine the factors important in the detection of thoracolumbar injury and also to produce a trial protocol, which could be tested retrospectively. Two hundred patients admitted between 1998 and 2000 were reviewed retrospectively to form a database of the relevant clinical features. The diagnostic pathway protocol was tested retrospectively in two groups; one hundred with known thoracolumbar fractures and one hundred undifferentiated multi-trauma patients. Sensitivity and specificity indices were determined using the chi-squared test of association.Falls and motor vehicle crashes were the most common mechanism of injury causing thoracolumbar fractures. No significant association could be found between mechanism of injury (MOI) and presence of thoracolumbar fracture. Clinical signs found to be associated with thoracolumbar fracture include: (1) back pain/midline tenderness (Sens 62.1% Spec 91.5%), (2) palpable midline step (Sens 13.8% Spec 100%), (3) back bruising (Sens 6.9% Spec 98.6%), (4) abnormal neurological signs (Sens 41.4% Spec 95.8%). Cervical level fractures were also found to be associated with an increased incidence of thoracolumbar fractures. Factors found to influence the detection of back pain/midline tenderness include: (1) GCS<15, (2) ETOH/drug intoxication, (3) major distracting injury. The proposed diagnostic pathway would have led to 92% of patients receiving TL imaging in group 2 (multi-trauma) with a sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 11.3% and a negative predictive value of 100%.From the literature and the results of the study, we propose that imaging of the thoracolumbar spine is required in those patients suffering from a high force mechanism of injury if any of the following are present: (1) back pain/midline tenderness, (2) local signs of thoracolumbar injury, (3) abnormal neurological signs, (4) cervical spine fracture, (5) GCS<15, (6) major distracting injury, (7) ETOH/ drug intoxication. An evidence based diagnostic pathway has been shown to be highly sensitive in determining the presence of TL fracture in a retrospective study of blunt trauma patients.Prospective evaluation of criteria for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in trauma patients.This study examined if use of clinical screening criteria for selective radiography of blunt trauma patients can identify all patients with thoracolumbar (TL) spine injuries. The study was a prospective cohort of patients undergoing TL spine radiographs following blunt trauma. Patients were considered at risk for TL spine injury if they had any of the following clinical criteria: 1) complaints of TL spine pain, 2) TL spine tenderness, 3) a decreased level of consciousness, 4) intoxication with ethanol or drugs, 5) a neurologic deficit, or 6) a painful distracting injury. Patients without any of these findings were considered at low risk for TL spine injury. Severity of mechanism of injury was also recorded. Data sheets were completed prior to TL radiography. Injury status was determined by the final faculty radiologist interpretation of all radiographic studies. A total of 2404 patients were enrolled. TL spine injuries were identified in 152 patients. Of these 152 patients with spine injuries, all 152 (100%, 95% confidence interval 98-100%) were considered high risk by having at least one of the high-risk criteria. These criteria have a specificity of 3.9%, a positive predictive value of 6.6%, and a negative predictive value of 100%. All of the high-risk criteria but intoxication with ethanol or drugs were important as sole predictors of TL spine injury. The use of high-risk clinical screening criteria identified virtually all blunt trauma patients with acute TL spine injuries. These criteria, however, have poor specificity and positive predictive value.Selective indications for thoracic and lumbar radiography in blunt trauma.To determine indications for thoracolumbar radiography.Case series with prospective data collection.Level I trauma center.Blunt-trauma victims more than 12 years old who underwent routine thoracic and lumbar radiography according to institutional protocol. Patients were classified as group 1, not able to be evaluated clinically (Glasgow Coma Scale score of less than 13, intoxication, intubation, or cervical neurologic deficit); and group 2, able to be evaluated clinically.Twenty-four of 319 patients sustained 25 thoracic or lumbar fractures. Seven of 136 group 1 patients and 17 of 183 group 2 patients had fractures. Eight of 17 patients with pain and 9 of 17 with tenderness had fractures (P = .001). No group 2 patients without pain, tenderness, thoracic or lumbar neuro-deficit, or major distracting injury, including cervical fracture, had fractures. The negative predictive value of pain and tenderness was 95%. Five of 46 patients with spinal fractures at any level had multiple fractures.Blunt-trauma victims who cannot be evaluated clinically should undergo thoracolumbar radiography. Routine radiography may be unnecessary in asymptomatic patients who can be evaluated clinically and who do not have neurologic deficits or distracting injuries. Spinal fracture at any level mandates complete spinal radiography.Indications for obtaining surveillance thoracic and lumbar spine radiographs.The purpose of this study was to identify risk factors for thoracic/lumbar spine fractures in patients with blunt injuries and subsequently establish indications for obtaining surveillance thoracolumbar radiographs. Retrospective review of all patients with blunt injuries (n = 1485) admitted in 1992 to a level I trauma center with a discharge diagnosis of thoracolumbar spine fracture established entrance criteria for a 4-month prospective study. Relative risk of fracture (RR) was calculated. Retrospective. Seventy-six percent (176 of 233) had radiographs; 21% had fractures; one diagnosed late. Prospective. One hundred percent (167 of 167) had radiographs; 9% (15 of 167) had fractures; none diagnosed late or missed. Forty percent (26 of 65) of patients with fractures had no pain or tenderness; 35% (9) required surgical spinal fixation. Our data define these indications for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in patients with blunt injuries: back pain (RR1), fall > or = 10 feet, ejection from motorcycle/motor vehicle crash > or = 50 mph, GCS score < or = 8, (all RR2), and neurologic deficit (RR10). The sensitivity of our surveillance radiography protocol has increased to 100%. The absence of back pain does not exclude significant thoracolumbar trauma.Radiography for back pain presenting to accident and emergency departments.In order to determine the relevance of radiographs of the lumbar spine in an A&E department 225 consecutive patients presenting in a 6-month period with acute back pain were studied. An analysis of the number of radiographs performed and their association with particular factors in the history and examination of the patient was performed. A total of 108 patients had radiographs (48%), with a total of seven fractures (6% of radiographs). All the patients with fractures had a history of direct trauma. Radiographs had no bearing on the decision to admit the patient. The indications for radiography of the lumbar spine in the A&E department are discussed.Use of lumbar spine films. Statistical evaluation at a university teaching hospital.Use of lumbar spine films was evaluated in a retrospective review of 1,095 lumbar radiological examinations in 871 patients. Patients' histories and physical examination findings were correlated with four groups of radiological findings: (1) radiologically normal, (2) incidental findings unrelated to patients' complaints, (3) diagnostic films compatible with symptoms, and (4) radiological findings of questionable clinical significance. The high percentage of nondiagnostic and questionable results suggests overuse of lumbar spine films. Forty-six percent of all studies in this investigation were normal or had incidental findings, and an additional 31.8% had radiological findings of questionable clinical significance. Three hundred seventy-five follow-up examinations (64.2%) demonstrated no radiological interval changes. Radiation exposure and medical cost of noncontributory studies may be substantially reduced by judicious consideration of the potential diagnostic yield of the examination and by careful selection of repeated or follow-up studies.Thoracolumbar fracture in blunt trauma patients: guidelines for diagnosis and imaging.The aim of the study was to determine a clinical diagnostic pathway for the imaging of the thoracolumbar spine in blunt trauma patients.A literature review was undertaken to determine the factors important in the detection of thoracolumbar injury and also to produce a trial protocol, which could be tested retrospectively. Two hundred patients admitted between 1998 and 2000 were reviewed retrospectively to form a database of the relevant clinical features. The diagnostic pathway protocol was tested retrospectively in two groups; one hundred with known thoracolumbar fractures and one hundred undifferentiated multi-trauma patients. Sensitivity and specificity indices were determined using the chi-squared test of association.Falls and motor vehicle crashes were the most common mechanism of injury causing thoracolumbar fractures. No significant association could be found between mechanism of injury (MOI) and presence of thoracolumbar fracture. Clinical signs found to be associated with thoracolumbar fracture include: (1) back pain/midline tenderness (Sens 62.1% Spec 91.5%), (2) palpable midline step (Sens 13.8% Spec 100%), (3) back bruising (Sens 6.9% Spec 98.6%), (4) abnormal neurological signs (Sens 41.4% Spec 95.8%). Cervical level fractures were also found to be associated with an increased incidence of thoracolumbar fractures. Factors found to influence the detection of back pain/midline tenderness include: (1) GCS<15, (2) ETOH/drug intoxication, (3) major distracting injury. The proposed diagnostic pathway would have led to 92% of patients receiving TL imaging in group 2 (multi-trauma) with a sensitivity of 100%, specificity of 11.3% and a negative predictive value of 100%.From the literature and the results of the study, we propose that imaging of the thoracolumbar spine is required in those patients suffering from a high force mechanism of injury if any of the following are present: (1) back pain/midline tenderness, (2) local signs of thoracolumbar injury, (3) abnormal neurological signs, (4) cervical spine fracture, (5) GCS<15, (6) major distracting injury, (7) ETOH/ drug intoxication. An evidence based diagnostic pathway has been shown to be highly sensitive in determining the presence of TL fracture in a retrospective study of blunt trauma patients.Prospective evaluation of criteria for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in trauma patients.This study examined if use of clinical screening criteria for selective radiography of blunt trauma patients can identify all patients with thoracolumbar (TL) spine injuries. The study was a prospective cohort of patients undergoing TL spine radiographs following blunt trauma. Patients were considered at risk for TL spine injury if they had any of the following clinical criteria: 1) complaints of TL spine pain, 2) TL spine tenderness, 3) a decreased level of consciousness, 4) intoxication with ethanol or drugs, 5) a neurologic deficit, or 6) a painful distracting injury. Patients without any of these findings were considered at low risk for TL spine injury. Severity of mechanism of injury was also recorded. Data sheets were completed prior to TL radiography. Injury status was determined by the final faculty radiologist interpretation of all radiographic studies. A total of 2404 patients were enrolled. TL spine injuries were identified in 152 patients. Of these 152 patients with spine injuries, all 152 (100%, 95% confidence interval 98-100%) were considered high risk by having at least one of the high-risk criteria. These criteria have a specificity of 3.9%, a positive predictive value of 6.6%, and a negative predictive value of 100%. All of the high-risk criteria but intoxication with ethanol or drugs were important as sole predictors of TL spine injury. The use of high-risk clinical screening criteria identified virtually all blunt trauma patients with acute TL spine injuries. These criteria, however, have poor specificity and positive predictive value.Selective indications for thoracic and lumbar radiography in blunt trauma.To determine indications for thoracolumbar radiography.Case series with prospective data collection.Level I trauma center.Blunt-trauma victims more than 12 years old who underwent routine thoracic and lumbar radiography according to institutional protocol. Patients were classified as group 1, not able to be evaluated clinically (Glasgow Coma Scale score of less than 13, intoxication, intubation, or cervical neurologic deficit); and group 2, able to be evaluated clinically.Twenty-four of 319 patients sustained 25 thoracic or lumbar fractures. Seven of 136 group 1 patients and 17 of 183 group 2 patients had fractures. Eight of 17 patients with pain and 9 of 17 with tenderness had fractures (P = .001). No group 2 patients without pain, tenderness, thoracic or lumbar neuro-deficit, or major distracting injury, including cervical fracture, had fractures. The negative predictive value of pain and tenderness was 95%. Five of 46 patients with spinal fractures at any level had multiple fractures.Blunt-trauma victims who cannot be evaluated clinically should undergo thoracolumbar radiography. Routine radiography may be unnecessary in asymptomatic patients who can be evaluated clinically and who do not have neurologic deficits or distracting injuries. Spinal fracture at any level mandates complete spinal radiography.Indications for obtaining surveillance thoracic and lumbar spine radiographs.The purpose of this study was to identify risk factors for thoracic/lumbar spine fractures in patients with blunt injuries and subsequently establish indications for obtaining surveillance thoracolumbar radiographs. Retrospective review of all patients with blunt injuries (n = 1485) admitted in 1992 to a level I trauma center with a discharge diagnosis of thoracolumbar spine fracture established entrance criteria for a 4-month prospective study. Relative risk of fracture (RR) was calculated. Retrospective. Seventy-six percent (176 of 233) had radiographs; 21% had fractures; one diagnosed late. Prospective. One hundred percent (167 of 167) had radiographs; 9% (15 of 167) had fractures; none diagnosed late or missed. Forty percent (26 of 65) of patients with fractures had no pain or tenderness; 35% (9) required surgical spinal fixation. Our data define these indications for obtaining thoracolumbar radiographs in patients with blunt injuries: back pain (RR1), fall > or = 10 feet, ejection from motorcycle/motor vehicle crash > or = 50 mph, GCS score < or = 8, (all RR2), and neurologic deficit (RR10). The sensitivity of our surveillance radiography protocol has increased to 100%. The absence of back pain does not exclude significant thoracolumbar trauma.Radiography for back pain presenting to accident and emergency departments.In order to determine the relevance of radiographs of the lumbar spine in an A&E department 225 consecutive patients presenting in a 6-month period with acute back pain were studied. An analysis of the number of radiographs performed and their association with particular factors in the history and examination of the patient was performed. A total of 108 patients had radiographs (48%), with a total of seven fractures (6% of radiographs). All the patients with fractures had a history of direct trauma. Radiographs had no bearing on the decision to admit the patient. The indications for radiography of the lumbar spine in the A&E department are discussed.Use of lumbar spine films. Statistical evaluation at a university teaching hospital.Use of lumbar spine films was evaluated in a retrospective review of 1,095 lumbar radiological examinations in 871 patients. Patients' histories and physical examination findings were correlated with four groups of radiological findings: (1) radiologically normal, (2) incidental findings unrelated to patients' complaints, (3) diagnostic films compatible with symptoms, and (4) radiological findings of questionable clinical significance. The high percentage of nondiagnostic and questionable results suggests overuse of lumbar spine films. Forty-six percent of all studies in this investigation were normal or had incidental findings, and an additional 31.8% had radiological findings of questionable clinical significance. Three hundred seventy-five follow-up examinations (64.2%) demonstrated no radiological interval changes. Radiation exposure and medical cost of noncontributory studies may be substantially reduced by judicious consideration of the potential diagnostic yield of the examination and by careful selection of repeated or follow-up studies.