CT angiography for brain death diagnosis.Lack of cerebral circulation is an important confirmatory test for brain death (BD). Conventional angiography remains the standard imaging method, but CT angiography (CTA) is emerging as an alternative. France accepts BD diagnoses relying on a score based on lack of opacification of 7 intracerebral vessels in CTA images. The purpose of this study was to validate the efficiency of this score and to evaluate the sensitivity of a novel 4-point CTA score in confirming BD.A prospective multicentric study was conducted during 12 months with 105 patients referred for CTA to confirm a clinical diagnosis of BD. Clinical data were recorded. CTA images were interpreted first by local radiologists at the referent center, resulting in a 7-point score based on lack of opacification of the pericallosal and cortical segments of the middle cerebral arteries (MCAs), internal cerebral veins (ICVs), and 1 great cerebral vein per patient and, second, by a consensus panel of 3 expert radiologists, blinded to the initial scores, resulting in novel 4-point scores based on the lack of opacification of the cortical segments of the MCAs and ICVs.Injection of contrast medium did not alter renal function. With the initial 7-point score, sensitivity was 62.8%. With the simplified 4-point score, sensitivity was 85.7% and specificity was 100%. Opacification of ICVs was absent in 98.1% of patients.Lack of opacification in the cortical segments of the MCAs and internal veins in CTA is efficient and reliable for confirming BD.Computed tomography angiography (CTA) to prove circulatory arrest for the diagnosis of brain death in the context of organ transplantation.For the determination of brain death (BD) in potential organ donors, confirmatory tests that show cessation of cerebral circulation are used in many countries. Conventional angiography is considered the golden standard among these ancillary examinations. In recent years other angiographic techniques such as CT angiography (CTA) have been increasingly employed to establish the diagnosis of BD. We report our experience with CTA in this setting.From 2007 to 2010, 29 patients were examined in order to determine BD using CTA. The studies consisted of an unenhanced head scan, a CT angiogram of the brain supplying vessels in the head and neck and a second head scan 80 seconds after contrast injection (venous phase). The studies were retrospectively re-evaluated by two experienced neuroradiologists according to the criteria accepted by the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences.In 22 patients, cessation of cerebral circulation was confirmed in the venous phase CT. In seven patients, cessation of brain circulation was not confirmed due to residual contrast enhancement in the relevant cerebral vessels, i.e. the M4-segments of the middle cerebral artery and/or the internal cerebral veins. In these patients, clinical re-evaluation after a minimum of six hours confirmed the diagnosis of BD. Using the clinical examination as the "golden standard," CTA achieved a sensitivity of 75.9%.CTA is a useful additional tool for the confirmation of the diagnosis of brain death. Pooling of contrast in the relevant cerebral vessels, however, can be detected in up to 25% of CTAs in clinically brain dead patients.CT angiography as a confirmatory test in brain death.From recent studies, it remains unclear whether CT angiography could be an alternative to other established ancillary tests for the diagnosis of brain death. We examined intracranial contrast enhancement in CT angiography after clinically established brain death and compared the results with EEG and TCD findings.Prospective study between April 2008 and January 2010. EEG, TCD and CT angiography were performed in 40 patients aged between 18 and 88 years (mean 56 years) who fulfilled the clinical criteria of brain death.In all cases, the common carotid artery, cervical internal carotid artery, cervical vertebral artery and superficial temporal artery opacified in an arterial CT angiography series. 37 out of 40 cases demonstrated no opacification of both MCA-M4, ACA-A3, PCA-P2 segments, and BA.CT angiography is a promising method of evaluating intracranial circulatory arrest in brain death with a high spatial and temporal resolution, superior to all other established technical procedures. The examination is easily accessible in most hospitals, operator independent, minimally invasive and inexpensive. Therefore, CT angiography has the potential to enlarge the existing armamentarium of confirmatory brain death tests.Limitations of brain death in the interpretation of computed tomographic angiography.Limitations of computed tomographic angiography in the diagnosis of brain death.To evaluate the accuracy of cerebral computed tomographic angiography (CT-a) for the diagnosis of brain death (BD).Prospective observational study in intensive care units.Twenty-one clinically BD patients enrolled over 12 months.All clinically BD patients were evaluated by electroencephalography (EEG) and CT-a after exclusion of hypothermia and drug intoxication. Data collected included: demographic characteristics, cause of BD, delay between in-hospital admission and BD diagnosis and between EEG and CT-a, occurrence of cardiac arrest, administration of vasoactive agents, results of EEG and CT-a. We evaluated the sensitivity of EEG and CT-a and their agreement. Groups were compared according to BD diagnosis by EEG and CT-a (E+C+), or only by EEG (E+C(-)). Statistical analysis were performed by Mann-Whitney test and Fisher's exact test. BD was confirmed by EEG in all cases (sensitivity 100%) whereas only 11 patients of 21 had no cerebral perfusion during CT-a (sensitivity 52.4%). No agreement was documented between EEG and CT-a for the diagnosis of BD (kappa = 0). Patients' characteristics did not differ between E+C+ and E+C(-) groups. In the E+C(-) group arterial opacification was observed in 100% of patients, but opacification of the internal cerebral veins was achieved in only 30%.In clinically BD patients with no electroencephalographic activity CT-a documents opacification of the intracerebral vessels in a significant percentage of the cases. Therefore CT-a cannot be recommended as a means of BD diagnosis.Blunt cerebrovascular injury screening with 32-channel multidetector computed tomography: more slices still don't cut it.We sought to determine the diagnostic accuracy of computed tomographic angiography (CTA) using 32-channel multidetector computed tomography for blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVIs).Unrecognized BCVI is a cause of stroke in young trauma patients. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), the reference standard, is invasive, expensive, and time-consuming. Computed tomographic angiography has been rapidly adopted by many institutions because of its availability, less resource intensive, and noninvasive nature. However, conflicting results comparing CTA and DSA have been reported. Studies with 16-channel CTA report a wide range of sensitivities for BCVI diagnosis.From January 2007 through May 2009, patients with risk factors for BCVI underwent both CTA and DSA. All CTAs were performed using a 32-channel multidetector CT scanner. Using DSA as the reference standard, the diagnostic accuracy of CTA for determination of BCVI was calculated.There were 684 patients who met the inclusion criteria. Ninety patients (13%) had 109 injuries identified; 52 carotid and 57 vertebral injuries were diagnosed. CTA failed to detect 53 confirmed BCVI, yielding a sensitivity of 51%.Given the devastation of stroke, and high mortality from missed injuries, this study demonstrates that even with more advanced technology (32 vs 16 channel), CTA is inadequate for BCVI screening. Digital subtraction angiography remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of BCVI.Diagnosing brain death by CT perfusion and multislice CT angiography.Although the diagnosis of brain death (BD) is usually based on clinical criteria, in sedated patients, ancillary techniques are needed. This study was designed to assess the accuracy of cerebral multislice computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and CT perfusion (CTP) in diagnosing BD.Prospective observational study in 27 BD patients.All patients were diagnosed as BD based on clinical and electroencephalogram findings. After BD diagnosis, CTP was performed followed by 64-detector multislice CTA from the aortic arch to the vertex. Images were reconstructed from 0.5 mm sections. In 24 patients, a lack of cerebral blood flow (CBF) was detected by CTP, and CTA revealed luminal narrowing of the internal carotid artery in the neck and absence of anterior and posterior intracranial circulation (sensitivity 89%). CTA detected CBF exclusively in extracranial portions of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries. Two patients with anoxic brain injury and decompressive craniectomy showed CBF in the CTA such that the CTP results were considered false negatives, given BD had been confirmed by clinical and EEG findings, along with evoked potentials. In one clinically BD patient, in whom an alpha rhythm was detected in the electroencephalogram, CBF was only observed in the intracranial internal carotid with no posterior circulation noted. This patient was therefore considered exclusively brain stem dead.The radiological protocol used shows a high sensitivity and excellent specificity for detecting the cerebral circulatory arrest that accompanies BD. As a rapid, non-invasive, and widely available technique it is a promising alternative to conventional 4-vessel angiography.Diagnosis of brain death using two-phase spiral CT.The purpose of this study was to determine the utility of spiral CT in the diagnosis of brain death.Spiral CT was evaluated prospectively in 14 brain-dead patients and in 11 healthy subjects. A two-phase protocol was used. Twenty seconds after intravenous injection of a nonionic iodinized contrast medium, the CT table was drawn through the gantry at a rate of 10 mm/s while scanning was in progress. The second scanning phase was started automatically a mean of 54 seconds later, using the same parameters. Opacification or absence of opacification of carotid, vertebral, and basilar arteries and intracerebral veins was ascertained for each image in both phases. The diagnosis of brain death was confirmed by elecroencephalography (n = 7), angiography (n = 5), or both (n = 2). Statistical analysis with the Fisher exact test enabled us to compare the brain-dead patients with the healthy control subjects.In brain death, the pericallosal and terminal arteries of the cortex did not opacify during the two phases of spiral CT, whereas the superficial temporal arteries were always visible. The internal cerebral veins, the great cerebral vein, and the straight sinus did not opacify, whereas the superior ophthalmic veins were visible on both sides 13 times. For each vessel type, specificity was 100% for nonvascular opacification criteria on the right and left sides.Two-phase spiral CT can demonstrate the absence of intracerebral blood flow in brain death.Reliability of computed tomographic angiography in the diagnosis of brain death.This study examined the validity of cerebral computed tomographic (CT) angiography in the diagnosis of brain death (BD) compared with conventional cerebral angiography.This prospective, monocentric study was performed over a 24-month period and included 43 patients, at least 18 years of age, with clinical criteria of BD. All patients underwent cerebral CT angiography and then cerebral angiography. To confirm BD, the CT scan had to show the absence of perfusion of A2 anterior cerebral artery segments (A2-ACA), M4 middle cerebral artery segments (M4-MCA), P2 posterior cerebral artery segments (P2-PCA), basilar artery, internal cerebral veins, and finally the great cerebral vein. Cerebral angiography showed cerebral blood flow arrest at the level of the foramen magnum for posterior circulation and carotid siphon for anterior circulation.For 30 patients, BD was confirmed by both examinations. For 13 patients, cerebral angiography confirmed BD, whereas CT angiography still showed cerebral perfusion; the divergence rate was 30.2%.CT angiography seems to be a promising exam to confirm BD. However, the divergence with cerebral angiography is significant mainly concerning A2-ACA, which are proximal. It may be possible to only use the absence of opacification of M4-MCA, P2-PCA, basilar artery, and venous blood return to remain in conformity with the French law. In all cases, the international medical community should obtain a consensus for the interpretation of CT angiography to use it extensively as a complementary exam for BD.The role of spiral CT for the assessment of the intracranial circulation in suspected brain-death.The aim of this study was to assess the role of spiral CT for the diagnosis of brain death.Over a 12-month period, 15 patients that fulfilled the clinical criteria of brain death were referred from the intensive care unit to evaluate remaining intracranial blood flow by spiral CT. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed by an apnea test in all cases. Two phases of spiral CT were performed at 20 and 60 seconds after the start of contrast media injection. Qualitative analysis included the evaluation of vessel opacification (arteries and veins) by two radiologists in consensus.The cortical segments of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) were assessable in all patients, whereas the internal cerebral veins could not be evaluated in five patients due to artifacts or intracranial hemorrhage. Opacification of the major branches of the circle of Willis was observed in seven cases. Unilateral opacification of cortical branches of the MCA occurred in one. We did not observe bilateral enhancement of cortical MCA branches. The internal cerebral veins did not enhance in brain death.The absence of internal cerebral vein opacification and the absence of bilateral enhancement of cortical MCA branches constituted the best criteria of brain death by contrast enhanced spiral CT.Brain death confirmation: comparison of computed tomographic angiography with nuclear medicine perfusion scan.: Brain death is a difficult diagnosis to make, relying primarily on clinical examination. Ancillary tests are used when confounders exist. Nuclear medicine perfusion test (NMPT) is currently the preferred test for confirming brain death. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) may be an alternative test to confirm brain death. It is readily available 24 hours a day at most level I trauma centers and is easy to perform.: Patients with a clinical examination consistent with brain death were selected from the intensive care unit at a 550-bed teaching hospital. The patients underwent NMPT followed immediately by CTA. Both studies were read by radiologists blinded to the results of the alternative study. Absence of brain perfusion confirmed brain death. Multiple independent variables were collected on each patient including demographics, core body temperature, apnea challenge, mechanism of injury, timelines, renal function pre- and posttesting, organ donation, and time to procurement.: There were 25 patients enrolled in the study with multiple injury patterns. No false negative exams were identified on CTA when compared with NMPT. Three patients without flow on NMPT showed minimal flow on CTA. Each of these had open skull defects. Sensitivity of CTA was 0.86 and specificity was 1. There was no induced morbidity with regards to renal failure and organ donation.: CTA is a quick and efficient test for brain death confirmation. CTA demonstrated no false negative studies. The resolution of CTA seems to have an increased sensitivity for cerebral blood flow. Further studies with larger sample sizes need to be performed.A review of ancillary tests in evaluating brain death.The neurological determination of death (NDD) is primarily considered to be clinical. However, situations may arise where confounding factors make this clinical assessment difficult or impossible. As a result, ancillary tests have been developed in order to aid in the confirmation of brain death. As assessment of neuronal electrical activity; electroencephalography (EEG) is no longer recommended in this determination, tools assessing cerebral perfusion, as reflected by the presence or absence of cerebral blood flow (CBF), are the mainstay of NDD. The preferred ancillary test currently is Hexamethylpropylene amine oxime-single photon emission computed tomography (HMPAO SPECT) radionuclide angiography. When this is not available, or is equivocal, 4-vessel cerebral angiography can be used to determine the presence or absence of intracranial blood flow. However, as cerebral angiography has its own limitations, other techniques are sought by physicians in the Intensive Care and Neuro-intensive Care settings to replace cerebral angiography. In this article, we briefly review the history of diagnosis of brain death, pathophysiologic issues in making this determination, and currently available CBF imaging techniques, discussing each in turn with respect to their utility in the diagnosis of brain death.[CT angiography for the diagnosis of brain death: recommendations of the French Society of Neuroradiology (SFNR)].Usefulness of addition of CT perfusion to CT angiography for brain death diagnosis in a child.CT perfusion is a new technique that is rapid, available and minimally invasive which provides functional vascular information and can be made after conventional CT and CT angiography at the same imaging session. CT perfusion applications have focused on ischemic stroke with only a short series of applications to brain death diagnosis. Instead, CT angiography is frequently performed as a confirmatory test of brain death, but it has not been completely validated yet. Hence CT perfusion may help in supporting the diagnosis of brain death. We present the case of a 12-year-old child with clinical criteria for brain death who required a confirmatory test. CT angiography and CT perfusion were performed. Both revealed the absence of any intracranial blood flow which supported the clinical diagnosis of brain death.Computed tomographic angiography for diagnosis of brain death.The authors report two patients with suspected brain death who required confirmatory tests other than clinical examination because of prolonged barbiturate administration for intracranial hypertension. Absence of intracranial blood flow was documented on CT angiography and confirmed by CT perfusion images. Cerebral angiography confirmed the findings consistent with brain death. CT angiography with CT perfusion may represent a rapid noninvasive method for diagnosis of brain death.Computed tomographic angiography and perfusion in the diagnosis of brain death.According to Polish brain death (BD) criteria, instrumental confirmatory tests should be used in certain clinical situations, particularly any case for which clinical examinations seem inadequate. Electrophysiological tests are often unavailable. Therefore, cerebral perfusion testing is the method of choice with four-vessel digital subtraction angiography (DSA), the gold standard. Unfortunately, DSA is an expensive and invasive examination that requires an experienced neuroradiologist and the availability of an angiography suite. Recently, multirow computed tomographic devices became available, even in smaller hospitals in Poland. Despite this fact, computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and computed tomographic perfusion (CTP) are not accepted in BD diagnosis protocols in Poland because of limited experience and a lack of widely accepted criteria. In this situation, we started a multicenter trial to determine the accuracy of CTA and CTP to confirm BD.We examined 24 patients who fulfilled standard clinical BD criteria. We recognized the absence of brain perfusion in CTA examination following the criteria proposed by the French Society of Neuroradiology, namely, the absence of opacification of M4 middle cerebral artery segments (M4-MCA) and of deep cerebral veins.In all of our patients, CTA showed absence of opacification of M4 segments and of deep cerebral veins. In addition, three patients had CTA showing weak opacification of A2 segments of the anterior cerebral artery (A2-ACA) and M2 or M3-MCA. Opacification of the basilar artery or of the posterior cerebral arteries was not noted in any case. In all patients, CTP revealed zero values of regional cerebral blood volume and regional cerebral blood flow. Conventional angiography confirmed cerebral circulatory arrest in all 24 cases.CTA and CTP seem to be promising radiological examinations for the diagnosis of BD. They may be noninvasive alternatives to conventional cerebral angiography, and to the other instrumental confirmatory tests, that are unavailable or inadequate.CT angiography for brain death diagnosis.Lack of cerebral circulation is an important confirmatory test for brain death (BD). Conventional angiography remains the standard imaging method, but CT angiography (CTA) is emerging as an alternative. France accepts BD diagnoses relying on a score based on lack of opacification of 7 intracerebral vessels in CTA images. The purpose of this study was to validate the efficiency of this score and to evaluate the sensitivity of a novel 4-point CTA score in confirming BD.A prospective multicentric study was conducted during 12 months with 105 patients referred for CTA to confirm a clinical diagnosis of BD. Clinical data were recorded. CTA images were interpreted first by local radiologists at the referent center, resulting in a 7-point score based on lack of opacification of the pericallosal and cortical segments of the middle cerebral arteries (MCAs), internal cerebral veins (ICVs), and 1 great cerebral vein per patient and, second, by a consensus panel of 3 expert radiologists, blinded to the initial scores, resulting in novel 4-point scores based on the lack of opacification of the cortical segments of the MCAs and ICVs.Injection of contrast medium did not alter renal function. With the initial 7-point score, sensitivity was 62.8%. With the simplified 4-point score, sensitivity was 85.7% and specificity was 100%. Opacification of ICVs was absent in 98.1% of patients.Lack of opacification in the cortical segments of the MCAs and internal veins in CTA is efficient and reliable for confirming BD.Computed tomography angiography (CTA) to prove circulatory arrest for the diagnosis of brain death in the context of organ transplantation.For the determination of brain death (BD) in potential organ donors, confirmatory tests that show cessation of cerebral circulation are used in many countries. Conventional angiography is considered the golden standard among these ancillary examinations. In recent years other angiographic techniques such as CT angiography (CTA) have been increasingly employed to establish the diagnosis of BD. We report our experience with CTA in this setting.From 2007 to 2010, 29 patients were examined in order to determine BD using CTA. The studies consisted of an unenhanced head scan, a CT angiogram of the brain supplying vessels in the head and neck and a second head scan 80 seconds after contrast injection (venous phase). The studies were retrospectively re-evaluated by two experienced neuroradiologists according to the criteria accepted by the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences.In 22 patients, cessation of cerebral circulation was confirmed in the venous phase CT. In seven patients, cessation of brain circulation was not confirmed due to residual contrast enhancement in the relevant cerebral vessels, i.e. the M4-segments of the middle cerebral artery and/or the internal cerebral veins. In these patients, clinical re-evaluation after a minimum of six hours confirmed the diagnosis of BD. Using the clinical examination as the "golden standard," CTA achieved a sensitivity of 75.9%.CTA is a useful additional tool for the confirmation of the diagnosis of brain death. Pooling of contrast in the relevant cerebral vessels, however, can be detected in up to 25% of CTAs in clinically brain dead patients.CT angiography as a confirmatory test in brain death.From recent studies, it remains unclear whether CT angiography could be an alternative to other established ancillary tests for the diagnosis of brain death. We examined intracranial contrast enhancement in CT angiography after clinically established brain death and compared the results with EEG and TCD findings.Prospective study between April 2008 and January 2010. EEG, TCD and CT angiography were performed in 40 patients aged between 18 and 88 years (mean 56 years) who fulfilled the clinical criteria of brain death.In all cases, the common carotid artery, cervical internal carotid artery, cervical vertebral artery and superficial temporal artery opacified in an arterial CT angiography series. 37 out of 40 cases demonstrated no opacification of both MCA-M4, ACA-A3, PCA-P2 segments, and BA.CT angiography is a promising method of evaluating intracranial circulatory arrest in brain death with a high spatial and temporal resolution, superior to all other established technical procedures. The examination is easily accessible in most hospitals, operator independent, minimally invasive and inexpensive. Therefore, CT angiography has the potential to enlarge the existing armamentarium of confirmatory brain death tests.Limitations of brain death in the interpretation of computed tomographic angiography.Limitations of computed tomographic angiography in the diagnosis of brain death.To evaluate the accuracy of cerebral computed tomographic angiography (CT-a) for the diagnosis of brain death (BD).Prospective observational study in intensive care units.Twenty-one clinically BD patients enrolled over 12 months.All clinically BD patients were evaluated by electroencephalography (EEG) and CT-a after exclusion of hypothermia and drug intoxication. Data collected included: demographic characteristics, cause of BD, delay between in-hospital admission and BD diagnosis and between EEG and CT-a, occurrence of cardiac arrest, administration of vasoactive agents, results of EEG and CT-a. We evaluated the sensitivity of EEG and CT-a and their agreement. Groups were compared according to BD diagnosis by EEG and CT-a (E+C+), or only by EEG (E+C(-)). Statistical analysis were performed by Mann-Whitney test and Fisher's exact test. BD was confirmed by EEG in all cases (sensitivity 100%) whereas only 11 patients of 21 had no cerebral perfusion during CT-a (sensitivity 52.4%). No agreement was documented between EEG and CT-a for the diagnosis of BD (kappa = 0). Patients' characteristics did not differ between E+C+ and E+C(-) groups. In the E+C(-) group arterial opacification was observed in 100% of patients, but opacification of the internal cerebral veins was achieved in only 30%.In clinically BD patients with no electroencephalographic activity CT-a documents opacification of the intracerebral vessels in a significant percentage of the cases. Therefore CT-a cannot be recommended as a means of BD diagnosis.Blunt cerebrovascular injury screening with 32-channel multidetector computed tomography: more slices still don't cut it.We sought to determine the diagnostic accuracy of computed tomographic angiography (CTA) using 32-channel multidetector computed tomography for blunt cerebrovascular injuries (BCVIs).Unrecognized BCVI is a cause of stroke in young trauma patients. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA), the reference standard, is invasive, expensive, and time-consuming. Computed tomographic angiography has been rapidly adopted by many institutions because of its availability, less resource intensive, and noninvasive nature. However, conflicting results comparing CTA and DSA have been reported. Studies with 16-channel CTA report a wide range of sensitivities for BCVI diagnosis.From January 2007 through May 2009, patients with risk factors for BCVI underwent both CTA and DSA. All CTAs were performed using a 32-channel multidetector CT scanner. Using DSA as the reference standard, the diagnostic accuracy of CTA for determination of BCVI was calculated.There were 684 patients who met the inclusion criteria. Ninety patients (13%) had 109 injuries identified; 52 carotid and 57 vertebral injuries were diagnosed. CTA failed to detect 53 confirmed BCVI, yielding a sensitivity of 51%.Given the devastation of stroke, and high mortality from missed injuries, this study demonstrates that even with more advanced technology (32 vs 16 channel), CTA is inadequate for BCVI screening. Digital subtraction angiography remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of BCVI.Diagnosing brain death by CT perfusion and multislice CT angiography.Although the diagnosis of brain death (BD) is usually based on clinical criteria, in sedated patients, ancillary techniques are needed. This study was designed to assess the accuracy of cerebral multislice computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and CT perfusion (CTP) in diagnosing BD.Prospective observational study in 27 BD patients.All patients were diagnosed as BD based on clinical and electroencephalogram findings. After BD diagnosis, CTP was performed followed by 64-detector multislice CTA from the aortic arch to the vertex. Images were reconstructed from 0.5 mm sections. In 24 patients, a lack of cerebral blood flow (CBF) was detected by CTP, and CTA revealed luminal narrowing of the internal carotid artery in the neck and absence of anterior and posterior intracranial circulation (sensitivity 89%). CTA detected CBF exclusively in extracranial portions of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries. Two patients with anoxic brain injury and decompressive craniectomy showed CBF in the CTA such that the CTP results were considered false negatives, given BD had been confirmed by clinical and EEG findings, along with evoked potentials. In one clinically BD patient, in whom an alpha rhythm was detected in the electroencephalogram, CBF was only observed in the intracranial internal carotid with no posterior circulation noted. This patient was therefore considered exclusively brain stem dead.The radiological protocol used shows a high sensitivity and excellent specificity for detecting the cerebral circulatory arrest that accompanies BD. As a rapid, non-invasive, and widely available technique it is a promising alternative to conventional 4-vessel angiography.Diagnosis of brain death using two-phase spiral CT.The purpose of this study was to determine the utility of spiral CT in the diagnosis of brain death.Spiral CT was evaluated prospectively in 14 brain-dead patients and in 11 healthy subjects. A two-phase protocol was used. Twenty seconds after intravenous injection of a nonionic iodinized contrast medium, the CT table was drawn through the gantry at a rate of 10 mm/s while scanning was in progress. The second scanning phase was started automatically a mean of 54 seconds later, using the same parameters. Opacification or absence of opacification of carotid, vertebral, and basilar arteries and intracerebral veins was ascertained for each image in both phases. The diagnosis of brain death was confirmed by elecroencephalography (n = 7), angiography (n = 5), or both (n = 2). Statistical analysis with the Fisher exact test enabled us to compare the brain-dead patients with the healthy control subjects.In brain death, the pericallosal and terminal arteries of the cortex did not opacify during the two phases of spiral CT, whereas the superficial temporal arteries were always visible. The internal cerebral veins, the great cerebral vein, and the straight sinus did not opacify, whereas the superior ophthalmic veins were visible on both sides 13 times. For each vessel type, specificity was 100% for nonvascular opacification criteria on the right and left sides.Two-phase spiral CT can demonstrate the absence of intracerebral blood flow in brain death.Reliability of computed tomographic angiography in the diagnosis of brain death.This study examined the validity of cerebral computed tomographic (CT) angiography in the diagnosis of brain death (BD) compared with conventional cerebral angiography.This prospective, monocentric study was performed over a 24-month period and included 43 patients, at least 18 years of age, with clinical criteria of BD. All patients underwent cerebral CT angiography and then cerebral angiography. To confirm BD, the CT scan had to show the absence of perfusion of A2 anterior cerebral artery segments (A2-ACA), M4 middle cerebral artery segments (M4-MCA), P2 posterior cerebral artery segments (P2-PCA), basilar artery, internal cerebral veins, and finally the great cerebral vein. Cerebral angiography showed cerebral blood flow arrest at the level of the foramen magnum for posterior circulation and carotid siphon for anterior circulation.For 30 patients, BD was confirmed by both examinations. For 13 patients, cerebral angiography confirmed BD, whereas CT angiography still showed cerebral perfusion; the divergence rate was 30.2%.CT angiography seems to be a promising exam to confirm BD. However, the divergence with cerebral angiography is significant mainly concerning A2-ACA, which are proximal. It may be possible to only use the absence of opacification of M4-MCA, P2-PCA, basilar artery, and venous blood return to remain in conformity with the French law. In all cases, the international medical community should obtain a consensus for the interpretation of CT angiography to use it extensively as a complementary exam for BD.The role of spiral CT for the assessment of the intracranial circulation in suspected brain-death.The aim of this study was to assess the role of spiral CT for the diagnosis of brain death.Over a 12-month period, 15 patients that fulfilled the clinical criteria of brain death were referred from the intensive care unit to evaluate remaining intracranial blood flow by spiral CT. The clinical diagnosis was confirmed by an apnea test in all cases. Two phases of spiral CT were performed at 20 and 60 seconds after the start of contrast media injection. Qualitative analysis included the evaluation of vessel opacification (arteries and veins) by two radiologists in consensus.The cortical segments of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) were assessable in all patients, whereas the internal cerebral veins could not be evaluated in five patients due to artifacts or intracranial hemorrhage. Opacification of the major branches of the circle of Willis was observed in seven cases. Unilateral opacification of cortical branches of the MCA occurred in one. We did not observe bilateral enhancement of cortical MCA branches. The internal cerebral veins did not enhance in brain death.The absence of internal cerebral vein opacification and the absence of bilateral enhancement of cortical MCA branches constituted the best criteria of brain death by contrast enhanced spiral CT.Brain death confirmation: comparison of computed tomographic angiography with nuclear medicine perfusion scan.: Brain death is a difficult diagnosis to make, relying primarily on clinical examination. Ancillary tests are used when confounders exist. Nuclear medicine perfusion test (NMPT) is currently the preferred test for confirming brain death. Computed tomographic angiography (CTA) may be an alternative test to confirm brain death. It is readily available 24 hours a day at most level I trauma centers and is easy to perform.: Patients with a clinical examination consistent with brain death were selected from the intensive care unit at a 550-bed teaching hospital. The patients underwent NMPT followed immediately by CTA. Both studies were read by radiologists blinded to the results of the alternative study. Absence of brain perfusion confirmed brain death. Multiple independent variables were collected on each patient including demographics, core body temperature, apnea challenge, mechanism of injury, timelines, renal function pre- and posttesting, organ donation, and time to procurement.: There were 25 patients enrolled in the study with multiple injury patterns. No false negative exams were identified on CTA when compared with NMPT. Three patients without flow on NMPT showed minimal flow on CTA. Each of these had open skull defects. Sensitivity of CTA was 0.86 and specificity was 1. There was no induced morbidity with regards to renal failure and organ donation.: CTA is a quick and efficient test for brain death confirmation. CTA demonstrated no false negative studies. The resolution of CTA seems to have an increased sensitivity for cerebral blood flow. Further studies with larger sample sizes need to be performed.A review of ancillary tests in evaluating brain death.The neurological determination of death (NDD) is primarily considered to be clinical. However, situations may arise where confounding factors make this clinical assessment difficult or impossible. As a result, ancillary tests have been developed in order to aid in the confirmation of brain death. As assessment of neuronal electrical activity; electroencephalography (EEG) is no longer recommended in this determination, tools assessing cerebral perfusion, as reflected by the presence or absence of cerebral blood flow (CBF), are the mainstay of NDD. The preferred ancillary test currently is Hexamethylpropylene amine oxime-single photon emission computed tomography (HMPAO SPECT) radionuclide angiography. When this is not available, or is equivocal, 4-vessel cerebral angiography can be used to determine the presence or absence of intracranial blood flow. However, as cerebral angiography has its own limitations, other techniques are sought by physicians in the Intensive Care and Neuro-intensive Care settings to replace cerebral angiography. In this article, we briefly review the history of diagnosis of brain death, pathophysiologic issues in making this determination, and currently available CBF imaging techniques, discussing each in turn with respect to their utility in the diagnosis of brain death.[CT angiography for the diagnosis of brain death: recommendations of the French Society of Neuroradiology (SFNR)].Usefulness of addition of CT perfusion to CT angiography for brain death diagnosis in a child.CT perfusion is a new technique that is rapid, available and minimally invasive which provides functional vascular information and can be made after conventional CT and CT angiography at the same imaging session. CT perfusion applications have focused on ischemic stroke with only a short series of applications to brain death diagnosis. Instead, CT angiography is frequently performed as a confirmatory test of brain death, but it has not been completely validated yet. Hence CT perfusion may help in supporting the diagnosis of brain death. We present the case of a 12-year-old child with clinical criteria for brain death who required a confirmatory test. CT angiography and CT perfusion were performed. Both revealed the absence of any intracranial blood flow which supported the clinical diagnosis of brain death.Computed tomographic angiography for diagnosis of brain death.The authors report two patients with suspected brain death who required confirmatory tests other than clinical examination because of prolonged barbiturate administration for intracranial hypertension. Absence of intracranial blood flow was documented on CT angiography and confirmed by CT perfusion images. Cerebral angiography confirmed the findings consistent with brain death. CT angiography with CT perfusion may represent a rapid noninvasive method for diagnosis of brain death.Computed tomographic angiography and perfusion in the diagnosis of brain death.According to Polish brain death (BD) criteria, instrumental confirmatory tests should be used in certain clinical situations, particularly any case for which clinical examinations seem inadequate. Electrophysiological tests are often unavailable. Therefore, cerebral perfusion testing is the method of choice with four-vessel digital subtraction angiography (DSA), the gold standard. Unfortunately, DSA is an expensive and invasive examination that requires an experienced neuroradiologist and the availability of an angiography suite. Recently, multirow computed tomographic devices became available, even in smaller hospitals in Poland. Despite this fact, computed tomographic angiography (CTA) and computed tomographic perfusion (CTP) are not accepted in BD diagnosis protocols in Poland because of limited experience and a lack of widely accepted criteria. In this situation, we started a multicenter trial to determine the accuracy of CTA and CTP to confirm BD.We examined 24 patients who fulfilled standard clinical BD criteria. We recognized the absence of brain perfusion in CTA examination following the criteria proposed by the French Society of Neuroradiology, namely, the absence of opacification of M4 middle cerebral artery segments (M4-MCA) and of deep cerebral veins.In all of our patients, CTA showed absence of opacification of M4 segments and of deep cerebral veins. In addition, three patients had CTA showing weak opacification of A2 segments of the anterior cerebral artery (A2-ACA) and M2 or M3-MCA. Opacification of the basilar artery or of the posterior cerebral arteries was not noted in any case. In all patients, CTP revealed zero values of regional cerebral blood volume and regional cerebral blood flow. Conventional angiography confirmed cerebral circulatory arrest in all 24 cases.CTA and CTP seem to be promising radiological examinations for the diagnosis of BD. They may be noninvasive alternatives to conventional cerebral angiography, and to the other instrumental confirmatory tests, that are unavailable or inadequate.