A laparoscopy-based score to predict surgical outcome in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma: a pilot study.Our objective was to set up a more objective quantitative laparoscopy-based model in predicting the chances of optimal cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer patients.Sixty-four advanced ovarian cancer patients were submitted to both laparoscopy and standard longitudinal laparotomy sequentially, to define the chances of optimal debulking surgery (residual disease < or = 1 cm). Three patients could not be evaluated by laparoscopy because of the presence of multiple and tenacious adherences. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and overall accuracy were calculated for each laparoscopic parameter. On the basis of the statistical probability of each factor to predict surgical outcome, seven laparoscopic features were selected for inclusion in the final model. Each parameter was assigned a numerical score based on the strength of statistical association, and a total predictive index value was tabulated for each patient. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to assess the ability of the model to predict surgical outcome.After debulking surgery, 41 (67.2%) of 61 patients were left with optimal residual disease. The presence of omental cake, peritoneal carcinosis, diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, bowel and/or stomach infiltration, and liver metastases satisfied the basic inclusion criteria and were assigned a final predictive index value of 2. In the final model, a predictive index score > or = 8 identified patients undergoing suboptimal surgery with a specificity of 100%. The positive predictive value was 100%, and the negative predictive value was 70%.The reliability of laparoscopy in assessing the chance of optimal cytoreduction can be improved by using a simple scoring system.Laparoscopy in staging, follow-up, and restaging of ovarian carcinoma.Laparoscopy was systematically employed for the study of 143 cases of primary ovarian tumor in the various phases of staging, treatment, follow-up, and restaging. We found that laparoscopy allowed a more precise staging if used before laparotomy. Verification of response at any time in the course of therapy was readily achieved by laparoscopy.[Laparotomy vs. pelviscopy in adnexa processes--preoperative assessment, therapy planning and histology].The safety and efficacy of laparoscopic surgical staging and debulking of apparent advanced stage ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers.To describe our experience with laparoscopic primary or interval tumor debulking in patients with presumed advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancers.This is a retrospective analysis of a prospective case series. Women with presumed advanced (FIGO stage IIC or greater) ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancers deemed appropriate candidates for laparoscopic debulking by the primary surgeon(s) were recruited.The study comprised 32 patients who underwent laparoscopic evaluation. Seventeen underwent total laparoscopic primary or interval cytoreduction, with 88.2% optimal cytoreduction. Eleven underwent diagnostic laparoscopy and conversion to laparotomy for cytoreduction, with 72.7% optimal cytoreduction. Four patients had biopsies, limited cytoreduction, or both. In the laparoscopy group, 9 patients have no evidence of disease (NED), 6 are alive with disease (AWD), and 2 have died of disease (DOD), with mean follow-up time of 19.7 months. In the laparotomy group, 3 patients are NED, 5 are AWD, and 3 are DOD, with mean follow-up of 25.8 months. Estimated blood loss and length of hospital stay were less for the laparoscopy group (P=0.008 and P=0.03), while operating time and complication rates were not different. Median time to recurrence was 31.7 months for the laparoscopy group and 21.5 months for the laparotomy group (P=0.3).Laparoscopy can be used for diagnosis, triage, and debulking of patients with advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer and is technically feasible in a well-selected population.Diagnostic open laparoscopy in the management of advanced ovarian cancer.Optimal primary cytoreductive surgery (OPCS) plus adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) represents the standard management for patients with advanced ovarian cancer (AOC). Recently, some authors have suggested the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) followed by interval debulking surgery (IDS) in patients with unresectable AOC. This study has been started to evaluate the role of diagnostic open laparoscopy (DOL) in predicting who are the best candidates to OPCS.All patients newly diagnosed as affected by AOC were submitted to DOL in order to establish the possibility of OPCS considered as no residual tumor left after operation. Patients considered not susceptible of OPCS were submitted to three cycles of NACT, administered every 3 weeks (Carboplatin, targeted AUC = 6, plus paclitaxel 175 mg/mq), followed by IDS and adjuvant chemotherapy.From January 2000 to March 2004, 87 patients with AOC underwent DOL. Fifty-three patients (61%) were judged operable and therefore submitted to primary cytoreductive surgery (Group A). Optimal debulking rate in this group of patients was 96%. Thirty-four patients were judged affected by disease not cytoriducible to absent residual tumor and therefore scheduled for NACT-IDS-AC (Group B). Twenty-five patients were judged with partial clinical response and were therefore scheduled for IDS and AC. Optimal debulking rate (no residual tumor ) in Group B patients was 80%. No major perioperative complications, due to laparoscopy, occurred. All Group B patients received the first cycle of chemotherapy the day after DOL. In 34 patients (39%), an explorative laparotomy was avoided. With a median follow-up of 22 months (range 2-49 months), the proportions surviving were 87% and 60% in Group A and Group B patients, respectively.DOL could be considered a valid diagnostic tool in evaluating the extent of disease in AOC. Our data suggest that the use of DOL leads to decrease the rate of primary cytoreductive surgery for AOC; on the other hand, a higher optimal debulking rate (no residual tumor) at primary surgery is achieved.A laparoscopy-based score to predict surgical outcome in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma: a pilot study.Our objective was to set up a more objective quantitative laparoscopy-based model in predicting the chances of optimal cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer patients.Sixty-four advanced ovarian cancer patients were submitted to both laparoscopy and standard longitudinal laparotomy sequentially, to define the chances of optimal debulking surgery (residual disease < or = 1 cm). Three patients could not be evaluated by laparoscopy because of the presence of multiple and tenacious adherences. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and overall accuracy were calculated for each laparoscopic parameter. On the basis of the statistical probability of each factor to predict surgical outcome, seven laparoscopic features were selected for inclusion in the final model. Each parameter was assigned a numerical score based on the strength of statistical association, and a total predictive index value was tabulated for each patient. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to assess the ability of the model to predict surgical outcome.After debulking surgery, 41 (67.2%) of 61 patients were left with optimal residual disease. The presence of omental cake, peritoneal carcinosis, diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, bowel and/or stomach infiltration, and liver metastases satisfied the basic inclusion criteria and were assigned a final predictive index value of 2. In the final model, a predictive index score > or = 8 identified patients undergoing suboptimal surgery with a specificity of 100%. The positive predictive value was 100%, and the negative predictive value was 70%.The reliability of laparoscopy in assessing the chance of optimal cytoreduction can be improved by using a simple scoring system.Role of laparoscopy to evaluate candidates for complete cytoreduction in advanced stages of epithelial ovarian cancer.The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of laparoscopy in selecting candidates for complete cytoreduction surgery in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. We performed an explorative laparoscopy in 15 women presenting with advanced ovarian carcinoma, and for whom the preoperative evaluation was considered unsatisfactory, to define the possibility of achieving a complete cytoreduction. We focused on three sites of carcinomatosis: bowel, liver pedicle, and right diaphragmatic dome. Laparoscopic evaluation was successful in all 15 patients. Four patients were considered to have unresectable carcinomatosis because of extensive involvement of the small bowel and therefore had no laparotomy. These women underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the following 2 weeks. Eleven patients were considered to have resectable peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC). Ten women had no macroscopic residual tumor after surgery. A modified posterior exenteration was performed in five patients. The laparoscopic exploration had underestimated the liver pedicle involvement in two patients, but only one had an infracentimetric residual tumor after surgery. Laparoscopy is a reliable method of exploring PC in advanced-stage ovarian cancer. Laparoscopy may obviate the need for unnecessary laparotomy in many cases and may, therefore, contribute to a better quality of life for patients found to have unresectable disease.Laparoscopy in staging, follow-up, and restaging of ovarian carcinoma.Laparoscopy was systematically employed for the study of 143 cases of primary ovarian tumor in the various phases of staging, treatment, follow-up, and restaging. We found that laparoscopy allowed a more precise staging if used before laparotomy. Verification of response at any time in the course of therapy was readily achieved by laparoscopy.[Laparotomy vs. pelviscopy in adnexa processes--preoperative assessment, therapy planning and histology].Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary surgery for stage III/IV ovarian cancer: contribution of diagnostic laparoscopy.The aims of this retrospective study were to evaluate laparoscopic triage of patients with advanced ovarian cancer towards primary surgery or neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and to analyze outcome according to the treatment.Between January 2001 and December 2006, 55 patients with stage III - IV ovarian cancer underwent diagnostic laparoscopy. Primary surgery was performed when complete cytoreduction was considered feasible, while the other patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (platinum-based combination with taxanes) and interval surgery. All the patients received adjuvant chemotherapy.Patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (n = 29) had a higher mean body mass index (P = 0.048), higher serum CA 125 levels (P = 0.026), and more metastases (P = 0.045) than patients treated with primary surgery (n = 26). In patients treated with primary surgery, complete cytoreduction and a residual tumour size <or= 2 cm were obtained in respectively 54% and 77% of cases. Complete cytoreduction was achieved in respectively 100% and 33% of cases when primary surgery was performed by an oncologic gynaecologist and by a non-oncologic gynaecologist (P = 0.002). Interval surgery yielded complete cytoreduction and a residual tumour size <or= 2 cm in respectively 73% and 85% of cases. With a median follow-up of 24 months (range 7 - 78 months), the survival rates after primary surgery and interval surgery were 61% and 66% respectively.Diagnostic laparoscopy is useful for identifying patients with stage III/IV ovarian cancer who qualify for primary cytoreduction. Surgeon experience was a determining factor for the success of complete cytoreduction.The safety and efficacy of laparoscopic surgical staging and debulking of apparent advanced stage ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers.To describe our experience with laparoscopic primary or interval tumor debulking in patients with presumed advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancers.This is a retrospective analysis of a prospective case series. Women with presumed advanced (FIGO stage IIC or greater) ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancers deemed appropriate candidates for laparoscopic debulking by the primary surgeon(s) were recruited.The study comprised 32 patients who underwent laparoscopic evaluation. Seventeen underwent total laparoscopic primary or interval cytoreduction, with 88.2% optimal cytoreduction. Eleven underwent diagnostic laparoscopy and conversion to laparotomy for cytoreduction, with 72.7% optimal cytoreduction. Four patients had biopsies, limited cytoreduction, or both. In the laparoscopy group, 9 patients have no evidence of disease (NED), 6 are alive with disease (AWD), and 2 have died of disease (DOD), with mean follow-up time of 19.7 months. In the laparotomy group, 3 patients are NED, 5 are AWD, and 3 are DOD, with mean follow-up of 25.8 months. Estimated blood loss and length of hospital stay were less for the laparoscopy group (P=0.008 and P=0.03), while operating time and complication rates were not different. Median time to recurrence was 31.7 months for the laparoscopy group and 21.5 months for the laparotomy group (P=0.3).Laparoscopy can be used for diagnosis, triage, and debulking of patients with advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer and is technically feasible in a well-selected population.Role of laparoscopy to assess the chance of optimal cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer: a pilot study.To investigate whether laparoscopy can be considered as adequate and reliable as standard laparotomy in predicting optimal cytoreduction (RT < or = 1 cm) in patients with advanced ovarian cancer.From March to November 2003, 95 patients with suspected advanced ovarian or peritoneal cancer have been evaluated. Thirty-one cases were excluded due to an anesthesiological class of risk ASA III-IV (51.6%) and for the presence of a large size mass reaching the xiphoid (48.4%). Sixty-four patients completed the study. All patients were submitted to preoperative clinico-radiological evaluation and then to both laparoscopy and standard longitudinal laparotomy, sequentially. Some specific preoperatively defined parameters were analyzed during each procedure in order to obtain the most accurate evaluation on the possibility to get an optimal cytoreduction.The overall accuracy rate of laparoscopy in assessing optimal cytoreduction was 90%. The negative predictive value (NPV) of the clinical-radiologic evaluation corresponded to 73%, whereas in no case was the judgment of unresectable disease obtained by laparoscopy changed by the laparotomic approach (NPV 100%). On the contrary, an optimal debulking was achievable in 34 of 39 cases (87%) selected as completely resectable by explorative laparoscopy.Laparoscopy can be considered super imposable to standard longitudinal laparotomy in identifying not optimally resectable advanced ovarian cancer patients.Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary debulking surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of 285 patients.This study was aimed at comparison of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with primary debulking surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma.Retrospective analysis of 285 patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma treated between 1980 and 1997 was performed.In the period 1980-1988 all patients underwent primary debulking surgery and 82% were cytoreduced to less than 0.5 cm largest residual tumor mass (n = 112). Analysis of this group of patients showed that some subgroups of patients (e.g., Stage IV disease or a total metastatic tumor load of more than 1000 g prior to debulking surgery) had a poor survival despite cytoreduction to no or less than 1 g of total residual tumor load. The complication rate was high especially in the group with unfavorable prognosis (postoperative mortality, 6%). In the period 1989-1997 (n = 173) the patients were surgically evaluated to receive primary chemotherapy (43%) or primary debulking surgery (57%). Prognostic variables were similar for both treatment periods. The actuarial crude survival was higher in the second time period (3-year crude survival of 26% +/- 4. 3 and 42% +/- 4.6 for the first and second time periods, respectively; P = 0.0001). The postoperative mortality was 0% during the second time period. From 1993 on, the decision to give neoadjuvant chemotherapy or to perform primary debulking surgery in patients with clinically obvious metastatic disease was made with the help of an open laparoscopy (n = 77). Median duration of the laparoscopy, blood loss, and hospital stay due to this procedure were 25 min, 10 ml, and 2 days. Primary and interval debulking surgery was performed in 36 and 63% of this subgroup of patients, respectively.In this retrospective analysis over two different time periods, crude survival was higher when treating about half of the patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma with primary chemotherapy instead of primary debulking surgery. The role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be evaluated in a prospective randomized study.External validation of a laparoscopic-based score to evaluate resectability of advanced ovarian cancers: clues for a simplified score.The relevance of laparoscopy-based score in identifying patients with advanced ovarian cancer for optimal cytoreductive surgery has been evaluated.55 patients with stage III-IV ovarian cancer, having undergone both laparoscopy and laparotomy for cytoreductive surgery, were retrospectively analyzed. Seven parameters were assessed: omental cake, peritoneal carcinosis, diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, bowel infiltration, stomach infiltration, liver metastases. Each parameter was assigned 2 points if present and 0 if not (Fagotti score). Sensitivity, specificity, positive (PPV) and negative (NPV) predictive values, and accuracy were calculated for each parameter. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to predict the surgical outcome.A laparoscopy-based score of >or=8 was associated with suboptimal cytoreduction with sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of 46%, 89%, 89%, 44%, and 60% respectively. ROC curve analysis gave an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.74. A modified score was set up by selecting 4 of the 7 parameters which satisfied the inclusion criteria in our population: diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, stomach infiltration, liver metastases. Thirteen patients (12%) had a modified score of >or=4 and 42 patients (88%) had a score of <4 with an optimal cytoreduction rate of 0% and 43% respectively (P=0.002). A modified score of >or=4 was associated with suboptimal cytoreduction with sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of 35%, 100%, 100%, 43%, and 56% respectively. ROC curve analysis gave an AUC of 0.68.This simplified laparoscopy-based score was at least as accurate as the Fagotti score to predict resectability.Diagnostic open laparoscopy in the management of advanced ovarian cancer.Optimal primary cytoreductive surgery (OPCS) plus adjuvant chemotherapy (AC) represents the standard management for patients with advanced ovarian cancer (AOC). Recently, some authors have suggested the use of neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT) followed by interval debulking surgery (IDS) in patients with unresectable AOC. This study has been started to evaluate the role of diagnostic open laparoscopy (DOL) in predicting who are the best candidates to OPCS.All patients newly diagnosed as affected by AOC were submitted to DOL in order to establish the possibility of OPCS considered as no residual tumor left after operation. Patients considered not susceptible of OPCS were submitted to three cycles of NACT, administered every 3 weeks (Carboplatin, targeted AUC = 6, plus paclitaxel 175 mg/mq), followed by IDS and adjuvant chemotherapy.From January 2000 to March 2004, 87 patients with AOC underwent DOL. Fifty-three patients (61%) were judged operable and therefore submitted to primary cytoreductive surgery (Group A). Optimal debulking rate in this group of patients was 96%. Thirty-four patients were judged affected by disease not cytoriducible to absent residual tumor and therefore scheduled for NACT-IDS-AC (Group B). Twenty-five patients were judged with partial clinical response and were therefore scheduled for IDS and AC. Optimal debulking rate (no residual tumor ) in Group B patients was 80%. No major perioperative complications, due to laparoscopy, occurred. All Group B patients received the first cycle of chemotherapy the day after DOL. In 34 patients (39%), an explorative laparotomy was avoided. With a median follow-up of 22 months (range 2-49 months), the proportions surviving were 87% and 60% in Group A and Group B patients, respectively.DOL could be considered a valid diagnostic tool in evaluating the extent of disease in AOC. Our data suggest that the use of DOL leads to decrease the rate of primary cytoreductive surgery for AOC; on the other hand, a higher optimal debulking rate (no residual tumor) at primary surgery is achieved.A laparoscopy-based score to predict surgical outcome in patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma: a pilot study.Our objective was to set up a more objective quantitative laparoscopy-based model in predicting the chances of optimal cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer patients.Sixty-four advanced ovarian cancer patients were submitted to both laparoscopy and standard longitudinal laparotomy sequentially, to define the chances of optimal debulking surgery (residual disease < or = 1 cm). Three patients could not be evaluated by laparoscopy because of the presence of multiple and tenacious adherences. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and overall accuracy were calculated for each laparoscopic parameter. On the basis of the statistical probability of each factor to predict surgical outcome, seven laparoscopic features were selected for inclusion in the final model. Each parameter was assigned a numerical score based on the strength of statistical association, and a total predictive index value was tabulated for each patient. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was used to assess the ability of the model to predict surgical outcome.After debulking surgery, 41 (67.2%) of 61 patients were left with optimal residual disease. The presence of omental cake, peritoneal carcinosis, diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, bowel and/or stomach infiltration, and liver metastases satisfied the basic inclusion criteria and were assigned a final predictive index value of 2. In the final model, a predictive index score > or = 8 identified patients undergoing suboptimal surgery with a specificity of 100%. The positive predictive value was 100%, and the negative predictive value was 70%.The reliability of laparoscopy in assessing the chance of optimal cytoreduction can be improved by using a simple scoring system.Role of laparoscopy to evaluate candidates for complete cytoreduction in advanced stages of epithelial ovarian cancer.The objective of this study was to evaluate the role of laparoscopy in selecting candidates for complete cytoreduction surgery in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. We performed an explorative laparoscopy in 15 women presenting with advanced ovarian carcinoma, and for whom the preoperative evaluation was considered unsatisfactory, to define the possibility of achieving a complete cytoreduction. We focused on three sites of carcinomatosis: bowel, liver pedicle, and right diaphragmatic dome. Laparoscopic evaluation was successful in all 15 patients. Four patients were considered to have unresectable carcinomatosis because of extensive involvement of the small bowel and therefore had no laparotomy. These women underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy in the following 2 weeks. Eleven patients were considered to have resectable peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC). Ten women had no macroscopic residual tumor after surgery. A modified posterior exenteration was performed in five patients. The laparoscopic exploration had underestimated the liver pedicle involvement in two patients, but only one had an infracentimetric residual tumor after surgery. Laparoscopy is a reliable method of exploring PC in advanced-stage ovarian cancer. Laparoscopy may obviate the need for unnecessary laparotomy in many cases and may, therefore, contribute to a better quality of life for patients found to have unresectable disease.Laparoscopy in staging, follow-up, and restaging of ovarian carcinoma.Laparoscopy was systematically employed for the study of 143 cases of primary ovarian tumor in the various phases of staging, treatment, follow-up, and restaging. We found that laparoscopy allowed a more precise staging if used before laparotomy. Verification of response at any time in the course of therapy was readily achieved by laparoscopy.[Laparotomy vs. pelviscopy in adnexa processes--preoperative assessment, therapy planning and histology].Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary surgery for stage III/IV ovarian cancer: contribution of diagnostic laparoscopy.The aims of this retrospective study were to evaluate laparoscopic triage of patients with advanced ovarian cancer towards primary surgery or neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and to analyze outcome according to the treatment.Between January 2001 and December 2006, 55 patients with stage III - IV ovarian cancer underwent diagnostic laparoscopy. Primary surgery was performed when complete cytoreduction was considered feasible, while the other patients received neoadjuvant chemotherapy (platinum-based combination with taxanes) and interval surgery. All the patients received adjuvant chemotherapy.Patients treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (n = 29) had a higher mean body mass index (P = 0.048), higher serum CA 125 levels (P = 0.026), and more metastases (P = 0.045) than patients treated with primary surgery (n = 26). In patients treated with primary surgery, complete cytoreduction and a residual tumour size <or= 2 cm were obtained in respectively 54% and 77% of cases. Complete cytoreduction was achieved in respectively 100% and 33% of cases when primary surgery was performed by an oncologic gynaecologist and by a non-oncologic gynaecologist (P = 0.002). Interval surgery yielded complete cytoreduction and a residual tumour size <or= 2 cm in respectively 73% and 85% of cases. With a median follow-up of 24 months (range 7 - 78 months), the survival rates after primary surgery and interval surgery were 61% and 66% respectively.Diagnostic laparoscopy is useful for identifying patients with stage III/IV ovarian cancer who qualify for primary cytoreduction. Surgeon experience was a determining factor for the success of complete cytoreduction.The safety and efficacy of laparoscopic surgical staging and debulking of apparent advanced stage ovarian, fallopian tube, and primary peritoneal cancers.To describe our experience with laparoscopic primary or interval tumor debulking in patients with presumed advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or peritoneal cancers.This is a retrospective analysis of a prospective case series. Women with presumed advanced (FIGO stage IIC or greater) ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancers deemed appropriate candidates for laparoscopic debulking by the primary surgeon(s) were recruited.The study comprised 32 patients who underwent laparoscopic evaluation. Seventeen underwent total laparoscopic primary or interval cytoreduction, with 88.2% optimal cytoreduction. Eleven underwent diagnostic laparoscopy and conversion to laparotomy for cytoreduction, with 72.7% optimal cytoreduction. Four patients had biopsies, limited cytoreduction, or both. In the laparoscopy group, 9 patients have no evidence of disease (NED), 6 are alive with disease (AWD), and 2 have died of disease (DOD), with mean follow-up time of 19.7 months. In the laparotomy group, 3 patients are NED, 5 are AWD, and 3 are DOD, with mean follow-up of 25.8 months. Estimated blood loss and length of hospital stay were less for the laparoscopy group (P=0.008 and P=0.03), while operating time and complication rates were not different. Median time to recurrence was 31.7 months for the laparoscopy group and 21.5 months for the laparotomy group (P=0.3).Laparoscopy can be used for diagnosis, triage, and debulking of patients with advanced ovarian, fallopian tube, or primary peritoneal cancer and is technically feasible in a well-selected population.Role of laparoscopy to assess the chance of optimal cytoreductive surgery in advanced ovarian cancer: a pilot study.To investigate whether laparoscopy can be considered as adequate and reliable as standard laparotomy in predicting optimal cytoreduction (RT < or = 1 cm) in patients with advanced ovarian cancer.From March to November 2003, 95 patients with suspected advanced ovarian or peritoneal cancer have been evaluated. Thirty-one cases were excluded due to an anesthesiological class of risk ASA III-IV (51.6%) and for the presence of a large size mass reaching the xiphoid (48.4%). Sixty-four patients completed the study. All patients were submitted to preoperative clinico-radiological evaluation and then to both laparoscopy and standard longitudinal laparotomy, sequentially. Some specific preoperatively defined parameters were analyzed during each procedure in order to obtain the most accurate evaluation on the possibility to get an optimal cytoreduction.The overall accuracy rate of laparoscopy in assessing optimal cytoreduction was 90%. The negative predictive value (NPV) of the clinical-radiologic evaluation corresponded to 73%, whereas in no case was the judgment of unresectable disease obtained by laparoscopy changed by the laparotomic approach (NPV 100%). On the contrary, an optimal debulking was achievable in 34 of 39 cases (87%) selected as completely resectable by explorative laparoscopy.Laparoscopy can be considered super imposable to standard longitudinal laparotomy in identifying not optimally resectable advanced ovarian cancer patients.Neoadjuvant chemotherapy or primary debulking surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma: a retrospective analysis of 285 patients.This study was aimed at comparison of neoadjuvant chemotherapy with primary debulking surgery in advanced ovarian carcinoma.Retrospective analysis of 285 patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma treated between 1980 and 1997 was performed.In the period 1980-1988 all patients underwent primary debulking surgery and 82% were cytoreduced to less than 0.5 cm largest residual tumor mass (n = 112). Analysis of this group of patients showed that some subgroups of patients (e.g., Stage IV disease or a total metastatic tumor load of more than 1000 g prior to debulking surgery) had a poor survival despite cytoreduction to no or less than 1 g of total residual tumor load. The complication rate was high especially in the group with unfavorable prognosis (postoperative mortality, 6%). In the period 1989-1997 (n = 173) the patients were surgically evaluated to receive primary chemotherapy (43%) or primary debulking surgery (57%). Prognostic variables were similar for both treatment periods. The actuarial crude survival was higher in the second time period (3-year crude survival of 26% +/- 4. 3 and 42% +/- 4.6 for the first and second time periods, respectively; P = 0.0001). The postoperative mortality was 0% during the second time period. From 1993 on, the decision to give neoadjuvant chemotherapy or to perform primary debulking surgery in patients with clinically obvious metastatic disease was made with the help of an open laparoscopy (n = 77). Median duration of the laparoscopy, blood loss, and hospital stay due to this procedure were 25 min, 10 ml, and 2 days. Primary and interval debulking surgery was performed in 36 and 63% of this subgroup of patients, respectively.In this retrospective analysis over two different time periods, crude survival was higher when treating about half of the patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma with primary chemotherapy instead of primary debulking surgery. The role of neoadjuvant chemotherapy should be evaluated in a prospective randomized study.External validation of a laparoscopic-based score to evaluate resectability of advanced ovarian cancers: clues for a simplified score.The relevance of laparoscopy-based score in identifying patients with advanced ovarian cancer for optimal cytoreductive surgery has been evaluated.55 patients with stage III-IV ovarian cancer, having undergone both laparoscopy and laparotomy for cytoreductive surgery, were retrospectively analyzed. Seven parameters were assessed: omental cake, peritoneal carcinosis, diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, bowel infiltration, stomach infiltration, liver metastases. Each parameter was assigned 2 points if present and 0 if not (Fagotti score). Sensitivity, specificity, positive (PPV) and negative (NPV) predictive values, and accuracy were calculated for each parameter. Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to predict the surgical outcome.A laparoscopy-based score of >or=8 was associated with suboptimal cytoreduction with sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of 46%, 89%, 89%, 44%, and 60% respectively. ROC curve analysis gave an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.74. A modified score was set up by selecting 4 of the 7 parameters which satisfied the inclusion criteria in our population: diaphragmatic carcinosis, mesenteric retraction, stomach infiltration, liver metastases. Thirteen patients (12%) had a modified score of >or=4 and 42 patients (88%) had a score of <4 with an optimal cytoreduction rate of 0% and 43% respectively (P=0.002). A modified score of >or=4 was associated with suboptimal cytoreduction with sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of 35%, 100%, 100%, 43%, and 56% respectively. ROC curve analysis gave an AUC of 0.68.This simplified laparoscopy-based score was at least as accurate as the Fagotti score to predict resectability.