Effect of a modified toothpaste technique on approximal caries in preschool children.A 3-year, double-blind caries trial was conducted to evaluate the caries-reducing effect of a modified technique to use toothpaste. At the outset, 369 children, 4 years of age, were randomly assigned to four groups. At the end of the study, when the children were 7 years old, 281 (76%) had completed the trial. Two of the groups (test groups, n = 131) were given the following instructions regarding 'toothpaste technique': (1) to spread the paste evenly on the teeth prior to brushing, (2) not to expectorate more than necessary during brushing, (3) to filter the remaining dentifrice foam in the dentition, together with a sip of water, by active cheek movements for 1 min before expectorating, and (4) not to carry out any further water rinsings afterwards, and not to eat or drink for 2 h after brushing. The children in the other two groups (control groups, n = 150) were not given any instruction how to use the dentifrice and how to rinse after the brushing, but were, as the children in the test groups, encouraged to use the test dentifrice and to brush their teeth twice daily. Two commercial fluoride dentifrices (A and B) were compared: one of the test groups and one of the control groups used each product. Approximal carious lesions were scored on bite-wing radiographs at baseline and at the end of the study on the distal surface of the first and on the mesial surface of the second primary molars. No difference in caries increment was found between toothpastes A and B. The children in the two test groups developed a mean of 1.14 new dfs during the 3 years compared to 1.55 in the two control groups (p < 0.05). Thus, the results indicate that the modified toothpaste technique reduced approximal caries in preschool children by an average of 26%.Influence of an experimental sodium fluoride dentifrice on dental caries incidence in children.Schoolchildren residing in a fluoride-deficient area were provided either a sodium fluoride (0.1% F) or a nonfluoride dentifrice for home use. About half the children provided each type of dentifrice were also given an initial prophylaxis. Combining the data with regard to the type of dentifrice indicated that the sodium fluoride dentifrice resulted in dental caries reductions of 24 and 26% as noted by the two examiners, respectively.Caries prevention using a 1.2% sodium monofluorophosphate dentifrice in an aluminium oxide trihydrate base.A 3-year clinical trial was carried out in France just after fluoride toothpaste was allowed to be sold on the mass market. The aim was to assess the caries preventive effect of a toothpaste containing the maximum fluoride level permitted by the EEC (1.2% SMFP). The trial started with 1318 10-12-yr-old children from a wide socioeconomic background in a typical French community. Test toothpaste was given to 659 children whereas the remaining 659 children obtained the same toothpaste without the fluoride additive. The brushing was unsupervised and performed by the children at home. Dental caries was assessed by clinical and radiographic examinations. 1061 children completed the trial. An interview carried out at the final examination identified a group of 116 uncooperative children (less than five brushings a week on average) who were not included in the statistical analysis. The following mean reductions were found: 26% for DMFT, 27% for DMFS, and 39% for DMFSU. The DMFS index for approximal, buccal-lingual and occlusal surfaces showed caries reductions of 32%, 25%, and 22%, respectively. The trial demonstrated a highly significant effectiveness of the 1.2% SMFP toothpaste in a French population.Results from a three-year caries clinical trial comparing NaF and SMFP fluoride formulations.A three-year, double blind, randomised clinical trial was conducted in Polk County, Florida from 1983-1987. The objective was to compare the effect of four dose levels of sodium monofluorophosphate (SMFP) and a single dose level of sodium fluoride (NaF) on DMFS, DMFT, and DFS Interproximal indices. A total of 8,027 children were examined clinically and radiographically at baseline, and 5,474 children completed the three-year study, which included daily supervised brushing at school. No differences existed at baseline between the five study cells on age or gender distribution, or on any of the dental indices. Results indicated that the 2000 ppm F NaF group had significantly smaller DMFS increment than the 2000 ppm F SMFP group p < 0.005. The 2000 ppm F NaF group demonstrated an 18 per cent (26 per cent for children > 10 years at baseline) reduction in DMFS over the 1500 ppm F SMFP group, the 2500 ppm F group a 15 per cent (19 per cent) reduction, and the 2000 ppm F SMFP a 5 per cent (9 per cent) reduction. Results are strongest in children at greatest risk--older children with previous caries. This study concludes that the anticaries efficacy of SMFP dentifrices rises with increasing fluoride, and that the anticaries efficacy of a 2000 ppm NaF dentifrice is superior to that of a 2000 ppm F SMFP dentifrice, p < 0.005).The prevalence and severity of fluorosis and other developmental defects of enamel in children who received free fluoride toothpaste containing either 440 or 1450 ppm F from the age of 12 months.To assess the impact of a programme regularly supplying free fluoride toothpaste to children on the prevalence and severity of fluorosis and other developmental defects of enamel.Randomised, controlled, parallel three-group clinical trial. Two groups received toothpaste containing either 440 or 1450 ppm F; the third group received no intervention. Children were supplied with toothpaste and advice on its use from the age of 12 months until they were 5-6 years old. The participants were a sub sample of those involved in a study that considered the caries benefits of providing free fluoride toothpaste. They were eligible if they completed the main study, lived in four of the nine districts involved and attended schools with 6 or more eligible participants.Children from the north west of England consuming drinking water containing less than 0.1 ppm F were examined in primary schools.3731 children completed the main study. Of the 1833 children in the four selected districts, 927 were from schools with six or more participants.Digital images encompassing the upper and lower anterior sextants were taken of each child when they were 8-9 years old.Developmental defects of enamel and dental fluorosis (TF index) were recorded on upper central incisors from wet and dry images.A total of 703 children were included in the data analysis. In the 1450 ppm F (n=218), 440 ppm F (n = 226) and control (n = 259) groups the prevalence of dental fluorosis (TF > 0) was 17%, 15% and 12% for the wet (p > 0.05) and 26%, 24% and 25% for the dry (p > 0.05) photographs respectively. The prevalence of TF scores 2 or 3 (highest score) was 5%, 4% and 2% and for the wet (p > 0.05) and 7%, 4% and 5% for the dry (p > 0.05) photographs respectively. All subjects identified with TF score 3 were found in the group using the 1450 ppm F toothpaste (3 wet and 4 dry) and there were statistically significant differences between the three groups for both wet (p = 0.03) and dry photographs (p < 0.01). However, the pairwise comparisons between the groups failed to attain statistical significance. The highest prevalence and severity of demarcated opacities was seen in the control group and for the wet photographs the difference between the three groups attained statistical significance (p = 0.04). For both the wet and dry photographs the prevalence of any enamel defects (including fluorosis) and large demarcated or TF score 3 was similar for the three groups (p > 0.05).Previously it has been reported that only the provision of 1450 ppm F toothpaste provides anticaries benefits in a programme of this type. This benefit is accompanied by a slight increase in prevalence of TF score 3 but not the overall prevalence of developmental defects of enamel. Careful targeting and implementation of a programme of this type is required to maximise benefits and minimise risks of fluoride exposure.