A prospective randomized study of intraoperative thoracic epidural analgesia in off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery.The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis that general anesthesia (GA) plus thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) has no impact on the outcomes of off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery (OPCABs) compared to GA followed by patient-controlled TEA (PCTEA), while GA plus TEA leads to a higher requirement for vasoactive drug use.Sixty-four patients, American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status II and III, who were scheduled for elective OPCABs, were offered an epidural catheter inserted at the T2-3 interspace and then randomized into 1 of 2 groups according to whether TEA was applied intraoperatively. The TEA(perio) group received GA plus TEA, while the TEA(post) group received GA alone. All groups had postoperative PCTEA. The number of requirements for vasoactive drugs and the extubation times were recorded. The analgesic effect was monitored by visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores. Heart rate, blood pressure, and blood gases were also monitored. The data are presented as mean values ± standard deviation, or medians with quartiles.The proportion of vasoactive drug use was significantly higher in the TEA(perio) group intraoperatively (before or during completion of anastomoses: 59.4 vs. 20.7%, p = 0.004; after completion of anastomoses: 53.1 vs. 17.2%, p = 0.007). There was no statistically significant difference in extubation times or VAS scores between the 2 groups.We conclude that GA plus TEA has no impact on the outcomes of OPCABs, while its use leads to a higher requirement for vasoactive drug use. GA followed by PCTEA facilitates the anesthesia administration, while it does not affect the extubation time and the postoperative analgesic effect.Monitoring brain oxygen saturation during awake off-pump coronary artery bypass.To evaluate the changes in cerebral blood flow during awake off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting and compare with the changes during off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting under general anesthesia, using continuous monitoring of regional cerebral oxygen saturation.The study population comprised 3 groups of patients who had undergone off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting with thoracic epidural anesthesia, general anesthesia, or a combination of the two. Regional brain oxygen saturation, determined with a near-infrared oxygen monitor, and mean arterial pressure during surgery were calculated and compared among the 3 groups.Patients who had undergone awake off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting with thoracic epidural anesthesia had a significantly higher cerebrovascular impairment ratio, and the EuroSCORE was high. No significant differences were observed among the 3 groups in terms of the relationship between mean arterial pressure during surgery and regional brain oxygen saturation. It is suggested that there were no differences in cerebral blood flow and mean arterial pressure changes among the 3 groups.Awake off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting is a safe surgical technique for patients with history of cerebral infarction or impaired cerebral blood flow. Awake off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting is a less invasive procedure that allows efficient management of intraoperative cerebral blood flow, and can be equally effective as a percutaneous coronary intervention.High thoracic epidural analgesia in cardiac surgery. Part 1--high thoracic epidural analgesia improves cardiac performance in cardiac surgery patients.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the perioperative cardioprotective effect of high thoracic epidural analgesia (HTEA), primarily expressed as an effect on cardiac performance and hemodynamics in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.A randomized, prospective study.Sixty low-to-moderate risk patients between the ages of 65 and 80 years scheduled for elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery with or without aortic valve replacement.A university hospital.Patients randomized to receive HTEA as a supplement to general anesthesia.Perioperative hemodynamic measurements, perioperative fluid balance, and postoperative release of cardiac enzymes were collected. The end-diastolic volume index (EDVI), the stroke volume index (overall 38 v 32 mL), the cardiac index (overall 2.35 v. 2.18 L/minute/m(2)), the central venous pressure, and central venous oxygenation were higher in the HTEA group. The mean arterial blood pressure was marginally lower in the HTEA group, whereas no difference was noted in the heart rate or peripheral saturation between the groups. No differences were found in the postoperative levels of troponin T and CK-MB between groups. NT-proBNP changed over time (p < 0.001) and was lower in the HTEA group (p = 0.013), with maximal values of 291 ± 265 versus 326 ± 274.The findings of a higher stroke volume index and central venous oxygenation without an increase in heart rate or mean arterial pressure suggest that HTEA improves cardiac performance in elderly cardiac surgery patients.Nonanalgesic benefits of combined thoracic epidural analgesia with general anesthesia in high risk elderly off pump coronary artery bypass patients.Epidural anesthesia is a central neuraxial block technique with many applications. It is a versatile anesthetic technique, with applications in surgery, obstetrics and pain control. Its versatility means it can be used as an anesthetic, as an analgesic adjuvant to general anesthesia, and for postoperative analgesia. Off pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) surgery triggers a systemic stress response as seen in coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA), combined with general anesthesia (GA) attenuates the stress response to CABG. There is Reduction in levels of Plasma epinephrine, Cortisol and catecholamine surge, tumor necrosis factor-Alpha( TNF ά), interleukin-6 and leucocyte count.A prospective randomised non blind study.A clinical study in a multi specialty hospital.Eighty six patients. Material and Methods/intervention: The study was approved by hospital research ethics committee and written informed consent was obtained from all patients. Patients were randomised to receive either GA plus epidural (study group) or GA only (control group). Inclusion Criteria (for participants) were -Age ≥ 70 years, Patient posted for OPCAB surgery, and patient with comorbidities (diabetes mellitus, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, renal dysfunction). Serum concentration of Interlukin: - 6, TNF ά, cortisol, Troponin - I, CK-MB, and HsCRP (highly sensitive C reactive protein), was compared for both the group and venous blood samples were collected and compared just after induction, at day 2, and day 5 postoperatively. Time to mobilization, extubation, total intensive care unit stay and hospital stay were noted and compared. Independent t test was used for statistical analysis.Postoperative complications, total intensive care unit stay and hospital stay. Secondary Outcome: Stress response.Study group showed decreased Interlukin - 6 at day 2, TNF ά at day 2 and 5,troponin I at day 5, and decreased total hospital stay ( p < 0.05).Thoracic epidural anesthesia decreases stress and inflammatory response to surgery and decreases hospital stay. However a large multicentre study may be needed to confirm it.Thoracic epidural anesthesia for coronary bypass surgery affects autonomic neural function and arrhythmias.: In recent years, the invasiveness of coronary reconstruction has been markedly reduced. Awake off-pump coronary artery bypass (AOCAB), coronary bypass surgery with thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) without general anesthesia and cardiopulmonary bypass), has been reported in the literature. Because the details of this technique are still unclear, we evaluated its usefulness by examining the autonomic neural state and the incidence of arrhythmia.: Fifty-five patients who underwent elective coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) between April and December 2003 were included in the study. Patients who underwent CABG under high TEA alone comprised group A, those who underwent CABG under general anesthesia combined with TEA comprised group B, and those who underwent CABG under general anesthesia alone comprised group C. Holter electrocardiography was performed before and after surgery, and perioperative electrocardiograms were recorded (before surgery and during surgery, postoperative days 0-3, and postoperative day 7). On obtained electrocardiograms, the autonomic neural state was evaluated by analysis of heart rate variability, and the incidence of atrial fibrillation.: Concerning the autonomic neural state, sympathetic inhibition was observed during TEA in both groups A and B. After discontinuation of TEA, sympathetic activity recovered. Vagal activity was not inhibited in group A, but decreased during surgery and gradually recovered after surgery in group B. Evaluation of the balance between sympathetic and vagal activities showed that sympathetic activity became predominant rapidly on postoperative day 2 in group B but gradually after surgery in group A. The incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation was the highest in group B.: In AOCAB, because there is no vagal inhibition, vagal dominance can be maintained after surgery. This may be associated with the lower incidence of postoperative atrial fibrillation in group A compared with group B. Further studies are necessary to evaluate the details of AOCAB.High thoracic epidural analgesia decreases stress hyperglycemia and insulin need in cardiac surgery patients.Assuming that high thoracic epidural analgesia (HTEA) with the sympathetic block might decrease postoperative blood glucose (BG) level and reduce the need of insulin, the aim was to evaluate the effect of HTEA on the BG level and insulin requirement in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.Forty-two low-risk patients age 65-79 years scheduled for elective coronary artery bypass grafting with or without aortic valve replacement were randomised to receive HTEA as supplement for general anaesthesia. BG and lactate were measured before and after cardiopulmonary bypass and postoperatively at least every 3 h together with administration of insulin. Postoperative pain was evaluated 30 min, 2, 4 and 6 h after extubation, and before discharge from the intensive care unit.Overall BG levels showed great variation over time (P < 0.001). No statistically significant difference was found in perioperative BG, but postoperative lower BG levels were found in HTEA patients (P = 0.042). The number of patients not receiving insulin in postoperative period was significantly higher in HTEA group (9 vs. 2, P = 0.032). No differences were seen in lactate levels. Patients in the HTEA group had significant lower pain scores (P < 0.001).HTEA preserves glucose metabolism better and leads to a lesser degree of 'stress hyperglycaemia' in cardiac surgery patients.Can thoracic paravertebral block replace thoracic epidural block in pediatric cardiac surgery? A randomized blinded study.To compare the outcomes of thoracic epidural block with thoracic paravertebral block for thoracotomy in pediatric patients. A prospective double-blind study. 60 pediatric patients aged 1-24 months, ASA II, III scheduled for thoracotomy were randomly allocated into two groups. After induction of general anesthesia, thoracic epidural catheter was inserted in group E (epidural) patients and thoracic paravertebral catheter was inserted in group P (paravertebral) patients. Post operative pain score was recorded hourly for 24 hours. Plasma cortisol level was recorded at three time points. Tidal breathing analysis was done preoperatively and 6 hours postoperatively. Analgesia, serum cortisol level, and pulmonary function parameters were comparable in the two groups. However, failure rate (incorrect placement of catheter) was significantly higher in epidural group than in paravertebral group (7% versus 0%, respectively). The complications were also significantly higher in epidural group (vomiting 14.8%, urine retention 11.1% and hypotension 14.8%) than paravertebral group (0%, 0%, and 3.6%, respectively). We conclude that both thoracic paravertebral block and thoracic epidural block results in comparable pain score and pulmonary function after thoracotomy in pediatric patients; the paravertebral block is associated with significantly less failure rate and side effects.Does high thoracic epidural analgesia with levobupivacaine preserve myocardium? A prospective randomized study.Our study aimed to compare HTEA and intravenous patient-controlled analgesia (PCA) in patients undergoing coronary bypass graft surgery (CABG), based on haemodynamic parameters and myocardial functions.The study included 34 patients that were scheduled for elective CABG, who were randomly divided into 2 groups. Anesthesia was induced and maintained with total intravenous anesthesia in both groups while intravenous PCA with morphine was administered in Group 1 and infusion of levobupivacaine was administered from the beginning of the anesthesia in Group 2 by thoracic epidural catheter. Blood samples were obtained presurgically, at 6 and 24 hours after surgery for troponin I, creatinine kinase-MB (CK-MB), total antioxidant capacity, and malondialdehyde. Postoperative pain was evaluated every 4 hours until 24 hours via VAS.There were significant differences in troponin I or CK-MB values between the groups at postsurgery 6 h and 24 h. Heart rate and mean arterial pressure in Group 1 were significantly higher than in Group 2 at all measurements. Cardiac index in Group 2 was significantly higher than in Group 1 at all measurements.Patients that underwent CABG and received HTEA had better myocardial function and perioperative haemodynamic parameters than those who did not receive HTEA.High thoracic epidural analgesia in cardiac surgery. Part 2--high thoracic epidural analgesia does not reduce time in or improve quality of recovery in the intensive care unit.To evaluate the postoperative effect of high thoracic epidural analgesia on the time in the intensive care unit (ICU) and the quality of cardiac recovery in patients undergoing cardiac surgery.A randomized prospective study.Sixty low-risk patients 65 to 80 years of age scheduled for elective coronary artery bypass graft surgery with or without aortic valve replacement.A university hospital.Patients randomized to receive high thoracic epidural analgesia (HTEA) as a supplement to general anesthesia.The eligible time to discharge from the ICU and the quality of recovery were evaluated by an objective ICU scoring system. The time to eligible discharge from the ICU, the ventilation time, and the actual time in the ICU were not shorter in the HTEA group compared with patients receiving conventional general anesthesia. Patients receiving HTEA in addition to general anesthesia received less morphine postoperatively but with no consequent beneficial effect on respiration, nausea, sedation, or motor function.HTEA does not reduce the time in the ICU or improve the quality of recovery in the ICU.Effects of thoracic epidural anesthesia on flow and endothelium of internal thoracic artery in coronary artery bypass graft surgery.The internal thoracic artery (ITA) is the preferred conduit for coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery. The authors investigated whether thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) as an adjunct to general anesthesia (GA) can increase the blood flow of the ITA.A prospective randomized study.A university hospital.Patients with ischemic heart disease.Thirty patients scheduled for elective CABG surgery were randomized to receive either GA (n = 15) or GA + TEA (n = 15) after receiving institutional review board approval. Demographics showed similarity between the groups. The epidural catheter was inserted in the thoracic region between T1 and T5 levels. In the GA + TEA group, the patients received a 20-mg bolus of 0.25% bupivacaine through epidural catheters 1 hour before surgery, and this was followed by the infusion (20 mg/h) of 0.25% bupivacaine. In all patients, ITA free blood flow was measured before cardiopulmonary bypass and without the administration of any vasodilatory agent. A short segment of ITA was excised for histologic examination; immunocytochemistry analysis was performed using antirabbit polyclonal VEGF antibody, rabbit polyclonal inducible nitric oxide synthase (i-NOS) antibody, and adenosine anti-A2B receptor antibody. The immunoreactivity rates then were evaluated.The mean ITA free flow in the GA + TEA group was significantly higher than in the GA group (56.0 ± 9.0 mL/min v 39.6 ± 14 mL/min, p = 0.001). Immunostaining intensity in the sections after incubation with each primary antibody increased in the GA + TEA group compared with the GA group.The results of this study indicated that TEA increased ITA free blood flow significantly via increased VEGF, i-NOS, and adenosine-A2B receptor expressions. Therefore, the use of TEA as an adjunct to GA might be considered as an alternative to vasoactive agents for increasing ITA flow in CABG surgery.Effects of high thoracic epidural anesthesia on mixed venous oxygen saturation in coronary artery bypass grafting surgery.To investigate possible effects of high thoracic epidural anesthesia (HTEA) on mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2) in coronary artery bypass grafting surgery (CABGS) MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty-four patients scheduled for CABGS were randomly assigned to either test (HTEA) or control group. Standard balanced general anesthesia was applied in both groups. Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), heart rate (HR), oxygen saturation (SpO2), central venous pressure (CVP), cardiac output (CO), cardiac index (CI), systemic vascular resistance (SVR), pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), mean pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP), pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), pulmonary compliance (C), bispectral index (BIS), body temperature, SvO2, hematocrit values were recorded before induction. Postoperative hemodynamic changes, inotropic agent, need for vasodilatation, transfusion and additional analgesics, recovery score, extubation time, visual analogue scale (VAS) values, duration of stay in intensive care unit (ICU) and hospital were recorded.Study groups were similar in SpO2, CVP, PCWP, PAP, C, body temperature, BIS values, development of intraoperative bradycardia. In HTEA group, intraoperative MAP, SVR, PVR, need for transfusion were lower, whereas CO, CI, SvO2, hematocrit values were higher (p<0.05). Postoperative MAP, HR, hypertension development, need for vasodilatator, transfusion, analgesics, extubation time, recovery data, duration of stay in ICU, hospital were lower in HTEA group (p<0.05). VAS score decreased in 30 minutes and 12 hours following extubation in HTEA and control group, respectively.HTEA may improve balance between oxygen presentation and usage by suppressing neuroendocrin stress response; provide efficient postoperative analgesia, more stabile hemodynamic, respiratory conditions, lower duration of stay in ICU, hospital.Effects of epidural anesthesia on acute and chronic pain after coronary artery bypass grafting.To evaluate the effects of thoracic epidural anesthesia (TEA) as an adjunct to general anesthesia (GA) on postoperative pain after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).Between April 2009 and March 2010, 40 patients with ischemic heart disease scheduled for elective CABG were prospectively randomized to receive either GA (n = 20) or GA + TEA (n = 20). Through epidural catheters, patients received an infusion of (10-20 mg/h) 0.25%-bupivacaine intraoperatively and during the first 24 hours after surgery. Study endpoints included assessment of postoperative pain at rest and with coughing, rescue analgesic need, and postoperative course.The differences in pain scores were decreased at rest during 6 (0.1 ± 0.3 vs. 2.4 ± 1.8; p < 0.05) and 12 hours (0.1 ± 0.3 vs. 3.9 ± 2.3; p < 0.05) and with coughing at 6 (0.1 ± 0.3 vs. 5.6 ± 2.2; p < 0.05), 12 (0.1 ± 0.3 vs. 5.9 ± 2.3; p < 0.05), and 24 hours (0.05 ± 0.2 vs. 4.6 ± 2.9; p < 0.05) in the GA + TEA group. At one-month follow-up, pain scores were decreased in GA + TEA group (0.3 ± 0.7 vs. 1.6 ± 1.3; p = 003). There was no significant difference at three and six months. Mechanical ventilation time (4.7 ± 1.2 vs. 2.9 ± 1.1 hours; p < 0.05), intensive care unit stay (28.4 ± 9.0 vs. 22.4 ± 3.4 hours; p < 0.05), and hospital stay (7.2 ± 1.1 vs. 6.1 ± 0.3 days; p = 0.001) were reduced in the GA + TEA group.TEA significantly reduced the intensity of postoperative pain and analgesic consumption in the early postoperative period following CABG. The delivery of effective analgesia along with conventional medications may prevent chronic pain after surgery.Superior haemodynamic stability during off-pump coronary surgery with thoracic epidural anaesthesia: results from a prospective randomized controlled trial.Off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) surgery is a technically more demanding strategy of myocardial revascularization compared with the standard on-pump technique. Thoracic epidural anaesthesia, by reducing sympathetic stress, may ameliorate the haemodynamic changes occurring during OPCAB surgery. The aim of this randomized controlled trial was to evaluate the impact of thoracic epidural anaesthesia on intraoperative haemodynamics in patients undergoing OPCAB surgery.Two hundred and twenty-six patients were randomized to either general anaesthesia plus epidural (GAE) (n = 109) or general anaesthesia (GA) only (n = 117). Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP), heart rate (HR) and central venous pressure (CVP) were measured before sternotomy and subsequently after positioning the heart for each distal anastomosis.Both groups were well balanced with respect to baseline characteristics and received a standardized anaesthesia. The MAP decreased in both groups with no significant difference (mean difference (GAE minus GA) -1.11, 95% CI -3.06 to 0.84, P = 0.26). The HR increased in both groups after sternotomy but was significantly less in the GAE group (mean difference (GAE minus GA) -4.29, 95% CI -7.10 to -1.48, P = 0.003). The CVP also increased in both groups after sternotomy, but the difference between the groups varied over time (P = 0.05). A difference was observed at the third anastomosis when the heart was in position for the revascularization of the circumflex artery (mean difference (GAE minus GA) +2.09, 95% CI 0.21-3.96, P = 0.03), but not at other time points. The incidence of new arrhythmias was also significantly lower in the GAE compared with the GA group (OR = 0.41, 95% CI 0.22-0.78, P = 0.01).Thoracic epidural with general anaesthesia minimizes the intraoperative haemodynamic changes that occur during heart positioning and stabilization for distal coronary anastomosis in OPCAB surgery.