Thrombosis: the major Hickman catheter complication in patients with solid tumor.Major complications of Hickman catheter placement (thrombosis and infection) were determined in 168 patients with solid tumor (lung, 79; head and neck, 56; esophagus, 24; and miscellaneous, 9). Catheter-related thrombosis was clinically detected in 22 individuals and was detected at autopsy in six (total 17 percent). The 17 percent figure underestimates the true incidence of thrombosis since only 25 percent of study patients had autopsies. Patients with adenocarcinoma of the lung constituted a high risk group. Nine of 20 (45 percent) of these patients had thrombosis compared to 25, 9, and 16 percent of patients with squamous cell cancers of lung, head and neck and esophagus, respectively (p less than 0.002). Three patients with thrombosis had pulmonary emboli and two died. Thrombosis occurred despite daily heparin catheter flushing. INfections occurred in 11 patients. One had suspected endocarditis, one had a subcutaneous tunnel infection, and nine had exit site infections. All responded to local or systemic antibiotics. Better methods to prevent thrombosis are needed.Dalteparin for prevention of catheter-related complications in cancer patients with central venous catheters: final results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial.Cancer patients receiving chemotherapy experience thromboembolic complications associated with the use of long-term indwelling central venous catheters (CVCs). This prospective, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter study evaluated whether prophylactic treatment with a low molecular weight heparin could prevent clinically relevant catheter-related thrombosis.Patients with cancer undergoing chemotherapy for at least 12 weeks (n=439) were randomly assigned, in a 2:1 ratio, to receive either dalteparin (5000 IU) or placebo, by subcutaneous injection, once daily for 16 weeks. Patients underwent upper extremity evaluation with either venography or ultrasound at the time of a suspected catheter-related complication (CRC) or upon completion of study medication. The primary end point, as determined by a blinded adjudication committee, was the occurrence of a CRC, defined as the first occurrence of any one of the following: clinically relevant catheter-related thrombosis that was symptomatic or that required anticoagulant or fibrinolytic therapy; catheter-related clinically relevant pulmonary embolism; or catheter obstruction requiring catheter removal.There was no significant difference in the frequency of CRCs between the dalteparin arm (3.7%) and the placebo arm (3.4%; P=0.88), corresponding to a relative risk of 1.0883 (95% confidence interval 0.37-3.19). No difference in the time to CRC was observed between the two arms (P=0.83). There was no significant difference between the dalteparin and placebo groups in terms of major bleeding (1 versus 0) or overall safety.Dalteparin prophylaxis did not reduce the frequency of thromboembolic complications after CVC implantation in cancer patients. Dalteparin was demonstrated to be safe over 16 weeks of treatment in these patients.Tinzaparin vs Warfarin for Treatment of Acute Venous Thromboembolism in Patients With Active Cancer: A Randomized Clinical Trial.Low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended over warfarin for the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism (VTE) in patients with active cancer largely based on results of a single, large trial.To study the efficacy and safety of tinzaparin vs warfarin for treatment of acute, symptomatic VTE in patients with active cancer.A randomized, open-label study with blinded central adjudication of study outcomes enrolled patients in 164 centers in Asia, Africa, Europe, and North, Central, and South America between August 2010 and November 2013. Adult patients with active cancer (defined as histologic diagnosis of cancer and receiving anticancer therapy or diagnosed with, or received such therapy, within the previous 6 months) and objectively documented proximal deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism, with a life expectancy greater than 6 months and without contraindications for anticoagulation, were followed up for 180 days and for 30 days after the last study medication dose for collection of safety data.Tinzaparin (175 IU/kg) once daily for 6 months vs conventional therapy with tinzaparin (175 IU/kg) once daily for 5 to 10 days followed by warfarin at a dose adjusted to maintain the international normalized ratio within the therapeutic range (2.0-3.0) for 6 months.Primary efficacy outcome was a composite of centrally adjudicated recurrent DVT, fatal or nonfatal pulmonary embolism, and incidental VTE. Safety outcomes included major bleeding, clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding, and overall mortality.Nine hundred patients were randomized and included in intention-to-treat efficacy and safety analyses. Recurrent VTE occurred in 31 of 449 patients treated with tinzaparin and 45 of 451 patients treated with warfarin (6-month cumulative incidence, 7.2% for tinzaparin vs 10.5% for warfarin; hazard ratio [HR], 0.65 [95% CI, 0.41-1.03]; P = .07). There were no differences in major bleeding (12 patients for tinzaparin vs 11 patients for warfarin; HR, 0.89 [95% CI, 0.40-1.99]; P = .77) or overall mortality (150 patients for tinzaparin vs 138 patients for warfarin; HR, 1.08 [95% CI, 0.85-1.36]; P = .54). A significant reduction in clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding was observed with tinzaparin (49 of 449 patients for tinzaparin vs 69 of 451 patients for warfarin; HR, 0.58 [95% CI, 0.40-0.84]; P = .004).Among patients with active cancer and acute symptomatic VTE, the use of full-dose tinzaparin (175 IU/kg) daily compared with warfarin for 6 months did not significantly reduce the composite measure of recurrent VTE and was not associated with reductions in overall mortality or major bleeding, but was associated with a lower rate of clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding. Further studies are needed to assess whether the efficacy outcomes would be different in patients at higher risk of recurrent VTE.clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01130025.Optimal prophylactic method of venous thromboembolism for gastrectomy in Korean patients: an interim analysis of prospective randomized trial.Whereas routine prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism (VTE) is frequently utilized in the West, Asian physicians employ it much less often, based on its recorded rarity amongst their patients. This study was designed to examine the incidence of VTE and to determine the optimal method of thromboembolic prophylaxis following gastrectomy for cancer.In this prospective, randomized trial, patients were assigned to either an intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) only or an IPC plus enoxaparin. The primary end point of this study was to determine the VTE incidence rate within 30 days of surgery. A history with physical examinations for VTE and a serum d-dimer test was scheduled on postoperative days (POD) 0, 1, 4, and 7. Duplex ultrasonography (DUS) was performed as an objective test for deep vein thrombosis at POD 4. An interim analysis was performed to determine if it was ethical to continue the study. This clinical trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov (NCT01448746).Among the 220 patients, 3 (all from the IPC group) were diagnosed with VTE; these cases were asymptomatic, having been detected only on DUS 4 days after surgery. Postoperative bleeding occurred in 12 cases, among which 11 patients were in the IPC plus enoxaparin group.This interim analysis showed a higher incidence of VTE in the IPC group but a higher bleeding rate in the IPC plus enoxaparin group. We expect that this study, once completed, will provide information key to the determination of the optimal method for preventing VTE in Korean gastric cancer patients.Prophylaxis of catheter-related deep vein thrombosis in cancer patients with low-dose warfarin, low molecular weight heparin, or control: a randomized, controlled, phase III study.Whether an anticoagulant prophylaxis is needed for patients with cancer with a central venous catheter is a highly controversial subject. We designed a study to compare different prophylactic strategies over 3 months of treatment.We performed a phase III prospective, open-label randomized trial. After the insertion of a central venous access device, consecutive patients with planned chemotherapy for cancer were randomized to no anticoagulant prophylaxis, low molecular weight heparin [low molecular weight heparin (LMWH); with isocoagulation doses], or warfarin 1 mg/day. Treatments were given over the first 3 months. Doppler ultrasound and venographies were performed on days 1 and 90, respectively, or sooner in case of clinical presumption of thrombosis.A total of 420 patients were randomized, and 407 were evaluable. Forty-two catheter-related deep vein thrombosis (DVT) occurred (10.3 %), 20 in those with no anticoagulation, 8 in those receiving warfarin, and 14 in those receiving LMWH. Nine additional non-related catheter deep vein thrombosis (CDVT) occurred. Anticoagulation significantly reduced the incidence of catheter-related DVT (p = 0.035) and catheter non-related DVT (p = 0.007), with no difference between warfarin and LMWH. Safety was good (3.4 % of attributable events) but compliance with randomized prophylaxis was lower than expected.Prophylaxis showed a benefit regarding catheter-related and non-catheter-related DVT with no increase in serious side effects.Early and short-term acenocumarine or dalteparin for the prevention of central vein catheter-related thrombosis in cancer patients: a randomized controlled study based on serial venographies.We evaluated efficacy and safety of early and short-term prophylaxis with acenocumarine or dalteparin in the prevention of non-occlusive or occlusive central vein catheter-related thrombosis (CVCrT).Consecutive cancer patients scheduled for chemotherapy randomly received: acenocumarine 1 mg/day for 3 days before and 8 days after central vein catheter (CVC) insertion; dalteparin 5000 IU 2 h before and daily for 8 days after CVC insertion; no anticoagulant treatment (NT). All patients underwent venography on days 8 and 30, some of them on days 90, 150 and 210 after CVC.A total of 450 patients were randomized, 348 underwent at least two venography. Both acenocumarine and dalteparin reduced venography-detected CVCrT rate [21.9% acenocumarine versus 52.6% NT, odds ratio (OR) 0.3, P < 0.01; 40% dalteparin versus 52.6% NT, OR 0.6, P = 0.05]. Acenocumarine was more effective than dalteparin (OR 0.4, P = 0.01). The rate of occlusive CVCrT was not different in the three groups (0.9% acenocumarine, 3.3% dalteparin, 1.8% NT; P = 0.40). Most CVCrTs (95.6%) were observed on day 8 after CVC insertion and were non-occlusive.In this study of early and short-term prophylaxis, acenocumarine was more effective than dalteparin on non-occlusive and asymptomatic CVCrT events. The first days following CVC insertion represent the highest risk for CVCrT.[Central venous catheter and malignant disease. The value of thrombosis prophylaxis is questioned now].Edoxaban for venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer: results from a non-inferiority subgroup analysis of the Hokusai-VTE randomised, double-blind, double-dummy trial.Venous thromboembolism occurs commonly in patients with cancer. Direct oral anticoagulants are non-inferior to conventional anticoagulants for the treatment of venous thromboembolism. We hypothesised that edoxaban, a direct oral inhibitor of activated clotting factor Xa, might be more suitable than conventional anticoagulants in the management of cancer-associated venous thromboembolism. The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy and safety of edoxaban compared with warfarin in a subgroup of patients with cancer enrolled in the Hokusai-VTE trial.We did a prespecified subgroup analysis in August, 2013, and a post-hoc analysis of non-inferiority and safety in March, 2016, of the patients with cancer enrolled in the randomised, double-blind, double-dummy, multicentre, Hokusai-VTE trial done between Jan 28, 2010, and Oct 31, 2012. In this study, patients aged at least 18 years with acute symptomatic deep-vein thrombosis or acute symptomatic pulmonary embolism (with or without deep-vein thrombosis) were assigned to receive edoxaban 60 mg once per day (or 30 mg once per day for patients with a creatinine clearance of 30-50 mL/min, bodyweight <60 kg, or who were receiving concomitant treatment with the P-glycoprotein inhibitors quinidine or verapamil) or warfarin (dose adjusted to maintain the international normalised ratio between 2·0 and 3·0) or placebos for either group for at least 3 months up to 12 months. All patients received initial therapy with open-label enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin for at least 5 days. Edoxoban (or placebo) was started after discontinuation of initial heparin; warfarin (or placebo) started concurrently with the study regimen of heparin. In our analysis we examined data for a subgroup of these patients who had a history of cancer or who had been categorised as having active cancer by the study physician at the time of enrolment. Additionally, all patients with a history of cancer were reviewed post hoc and categorised according to the presence or absence of active cancer. The primary efficacy outcome was the proportion of these patients with symptomatic recurrent venous thromboembolism during the 12-month study period, analysed in the modified intention-to-treat population, with an upper limit of the CI for the hazard ratio (HR) of 1·5. The principal safety outcome was the proportion of patients who had clinically relevant bleeding in the population of patients who received at least one dose of the study drug. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT00986154.Of 771 patients with cancer enrolled in the trial, 378 were assigned to edoxaban and 393 to warfarin. Recurrent venous thromboembolism occurred in 14 (4%) of 378 patients given edoxaban and in 28 (7%) of 393 patients given warfarin (hazard ratio [HR] 0·53, 95% CI 0·28-1·00; p=0·0007). The upper limit of this 95% CI did not exceed the non-inferiority margin of 1·5 that was prespecified for the trial. Clinically relevant bleeding (major or non-major) occurred in 47 (12%) of 378 patients who received edoxaban and in 74 (19%) of 393 patients who received warfarin; HR for clinically relevant bleeding 0·64, 95% CI 0·45-0·92; p=0·017. Major bleeding occurred in ten (3%) of 378 patients with a history of cancer who received edoxaban and in 13 (3%) of 393 who received warfarin (HR 0·80, 95% CI 0·35-1·83).Edoxaban might be as effective as warfarin for the treatment of patients with cancer with venous thromboembolism, and with less clinically relevant bleeding. Additional clinical trials of edoxaban versus low-molecular-weight heparin for the treatment of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer are warranted.Daiichi Sankyo.Heparin based prophylaxis to prevent venous thromboembolic events and death in patients with cancer - a subgroup analysis of CERTIFY.Patients with cancer have an increased risk of VTE. We compared VTE rates and bleeding complications in 1) cancer patients receiving LMWH or UFH and 2) patients with or without cancer.Acutely-ill, non-surgical patients ≥ 70 years with (n = 274) or without cancer (n = 2,965) received certoparin 3,000 UaXa o.d. or UFH 5,000 IU t.i.d. for 8-20 days.1) Thromboembolic events in cancer patients (proximal DVT, symptomatic non-fatal PE and VTE-related death) occurred at 4.50% with certoparin and 6.03% with UFH (OR 0.73; 95% CI 0.23-2.39). Major bleeding was comparable and minor bleedings (0.75 vs. 5.67%) were nominally less frequent. 7.5% of certoparin and 12.8% of UFH treated patients experienced serious adverse events. 2) Thromboembolic event rates were comparable in patients with or without cancer (5.29 vs. 4.13%) as were bleeding complications. All cause death was increased in cancer (OR 2.68; 95%CI 1.22-5.86). 10.2% of patients with and 5.81% of those without cancer experienced serious adverse events (OR 1.85; 95% CI 1.21-2.81).Certoparin 3,000 UaXa o.d. and 5,000 IU UFH t.i.d. were equally effective and safe with respect to bleeding complications in patients with cancer. There were no statistically significant differences in the risk of thromboembolic events in patients with or without cancer receiving adequate anticoagulation.clinicaltrials.gov, NCT00451412.Enoxaparin increases the incidence of postoperative intracranial hemorrhage when initiated preoperatively for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis in patients with brain tumors.Prophylactic therapies have demonstrated efficacy in reducing the incidence of deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in neurosurgical patients. Retrospective analysis of patients undergoing neurosurgical procedures at the University of Michigan demonstrated a high incidence (14%) of postoperative DVT among patients with intracranial neoplasms treated with sequential compression device (SCD) prophylaxis alone. Therefore, we investigated the efficacy and safety of the low-molecular weight heparin enoxaparin in preventing DVT in patients with brain tumors. The goal of the study was to compare SCD, enoxaparin, and combined SCD/enoxaparin prophylaxis among patients requiring surgery for treatment of intracranial neoplasms.Eligible patients were randomized to SCD, enoxaparin, or combined therapy. Treatment was initiated before the induction of anesthesia and was continued throughout the hospital stay. Patients were screened for DVT, using duplex imaging, on four occasions in the first 1 month after surgery. The incidences of DVT and serious adverse events were compared between groups using analysis of variance and the Dunnet two-sided t test.Sixty-eight patients completed the study. Postoperative DVT occurred in 3 of 22 (13.6%) SCD-treated patients, 1 of 23 (4.3%) enoxaparin-treated patients, and 4 of 23 (17.4%) SCD/enoxaparin-treated patients. Differences were not statistically significant. Postoperative intracranial hemorrhage did not occur in patients in the SCD-treated group, whereas 5 of 46 patients receiving low-molecular weight heparin suffered clinically significant intracranial hemorrhage. The study was terminated because of the increased incidence of adverse events in the enoxaparin-treated groups.Enoxaparin therapy initiated at the time of anesthesia induction increases postoperative intracranial hemorrhage.Upper extremity deep venous thrombosis in cancer patients with venous access devices--prophylaxis with a low molecular weight heparin (Fragmin).Central venous access devices are often essential for the administration of chemotherapy to patients with malignancy, but its use has been associated with a number of complications, mainly thrombosis. The true incidence of upper extremity deep vein thrombosis (DVT) in this setting is difficult to estimate since there are very few studies in which DVT diagnosis was based on objective tests, but its sequelae include septic thrombophlebitis, loss of central venous access and pulmonary embolism. We performed an open, prospective study in which all cancer patients who underwent placement of a long-term Port-a-Cath (Pharmacia Deltec Inc) subclavian venous catheter were randomized to receive or not 2500 IU sc of Fragmin once daily 90 days. Venography was routinely performed 90 days after catheter insertion, or sooner if DVT symptoms had appeared. Our aims were: 1) to investigate the effectiveness of low doses of Fragmin in preventing catheter-related DVT; and 2) to try to confirm if patients with high platelet counts are at a higher risk to develop subclavian DVT, as previously suggested. On the recommendation of the Ethics Committee, patient recruitment was terminated earlier than planned: DVT developed in 1/16 patients (6%) taking Fragmin and 8/13 patients (62%) without prophylaxis (Relative Risk 6.75; 95% CI: 1.05-43.58; p = 0.002, Fisher exact test). No bleeding complications had developed. As for prediction of DVT, there was a tendency towards a higher platelet count in those patients who subsequently developed DVT, but differences failed to reach any statistical significance (286 +/- 145 vs 207 +/- 81 x 10(9)/1; p = 0.067). According to our experience, Fragmin at the dosage used proved to be both effective and safe in these patients.Randomized Phase III Trial of Standard Therapy Plus Low Molecular Weight Heparin in Patients With Lung Cancer: FRAGMATIC Trial.Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is common in cancer patients. Evidence has suggested that low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) might improve survival in patients with cancer by preventing both VTE and the progression of metastases. No trial in a single cancer type has been powered to demonstrate a clinically significant survival difference. The aim of this trial was to investigate this question in patients with lung cancer.We conducted a multicenter, open-label, randomized trial to evaluate the addition of a primary prophylactic dose of LMWH for 24 weeks to standard treatment in patients with newly diagnosed lung cancer of any stage and histology. The primary outcome was 1-year survival. Secondary outcomes included metastasis-free survival, VTE-free survival, toxicity, and quality of life.For this trial, 2,202 patients were randomly assigned to the two treatment arms over 4 years. The trial did not reach its intended number of events for the primary analysis (2,047 deaths), and data were analyzed after 2,013 deaths after discussion with the independent data monitoring committee. There was no evidence of a difference in overall or metastasis-free survival between the two arms (hazard ratio [HR], 1.01; 95% CI, 0.93 to 1.10; P = .814; and HR, 0.99; 95% CI, 0.91 to 1.08; P = .864, respectively). There was a reduction in the risk of VTE from 9.7% to 5.5% (HR, 0.57; 95% CI, 0.42 to 0.79; P = .001) in the LMWH arm and no difference in major bleeding events but evidence of an increase in the composite of major and clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding in the LMWH arm.LMWH did not improve overall survival in the patients with lung cancer in this trial. A significant reduction in VTE is associated with an increase in clinically relevant nonmajor bleeding. Strategies to target those at greatest risk of VTE are warranted.Risk factors for bleeding in major abdominal surgery using heparin thromboprophylaxis.Patients undergoing major abdominal surgery are at risk of both bleeding and thrombotic complications and usually receive heparin thromboprophylaxis.Risk factors for perioperative bleeding were examined in 3,809 patients in a double-blind, randomized trial investigating heparin thromboprophylaxis. The risk factors were modeled by logistic regression, and a risk score was calculated using the significant factors in the model.Bleeding was associated with the following factors in the model, given as adjusted odds ratios (ORa [95% confidence interval]): male sex (ORa 1.68 [1.21 to 2.34] P = 0.003), malignancy (ORa 1.69 [1.21 to 2.34] P = 0.008), gynecological surgery (ORa 1.62 [1.12 to 2.35] P = 0.011), and complex surgery (ORa 2.7 [2.02 to 3.62] P < 0.001). The risk of excessive bleeding for 0, 1, 2, and 3 risk factors was 2%, 6%, 11%, and 21%, respectively.The recognition of patients with these risk factors associated with perioperative bleeding should result in increased vigilance and may lead to modification of surgical and medical therapy.Intensified chemotherapy and simultaneous treatment with heparin in outpatients with pancreatic cancer - the CONKO 004 pilot trial.Advanced pancreatic cancer (APC), beside its high mortality, causes the highest rates of venous thromboembolic events (VTE). Enoxaparin, a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), is effective in prevention and treatment of VTE. Some small studies indicated that this benefit might extend to patients with cancer and probably prolong survival due to independent mechanisms. We initiated this safety investigation to get feasibility information on intensified chemotherapy combined with LMWH in outpatients with APC treated in 1st line.The trial was a prospective, open-label, single center investigation in outpatients with inoperable pancreatic cancer who were treated with intensified first-line chemotherapy along with concomitant application of subcutaneous LMWH. The combined chemotherapy consisted of gemcitabine 1 g/m2 (30 min), 5-FU 750 mg/m2 (24 h), folinic acid 200 mg/m2 (30 min), and Cisplatin 30 mg/m2 (90 min) on day 1 and 8; q3w for the first 12 weeks (GFFC) followed by gemcitabine alone in patients without cancer progression. The simultaneous application of prophylactic enoxaparin started on day 1 of chemotherapy with a fixed dose of 40 mg daily. Statistical analyses were performed using R 3.01 with software package CMPRSK and SPSS software v19.0.The investigation was stopped after recruitment of 19 patients. At this time 15 patients had completed the required 12 weeks of treatment. Based on 71 cycles of GFFC + enoxaparin (median 4/pt [range: 2-4]) and 108 cycles of single-agent gemcitabine + enoxaparin (median 4/pt [range: 0-18]) the cumulative frequency of NCI-CTC toxicities grade 3/4 was below 10%. One case (5%) of a symptomatic non-lethal thromboembolic event was observed while receiving LMWH treatment. No severe bleeding event as defined in the protocol has been observed. The median overall survival was 10.05 [95% CI: 8.67-18.14] months.The addition of enoxaparin to GFFC chemotherapy is feasible, safe and does not appear to affect the efficacy or the toxicity profile of the chemotherapy regimen in patients with advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Based on these findings we have initiated the randomized CONKO-004 trial to examine whether enoxaparin reduces the incidence of thromboembolic events or increases overall outcome.Clinical Trials NCT01945879.Risk factors for bleeding during treatment of acute venous thromboembolism.Identification of risk factors for bleeding and prospective evaluation of two bleeding risk scores in the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism.Secondary analysis of a prospective, randomized, assessorblind, multicenter clinical trial.One university and 2 regional teaching hospitals.188 patients treated with heparin or danaparoid for acute venous thromboembolism.The presenting clinical features, the doses of the drugs, and the anticoagulant responses were analyzed using univariate and multivariate logistic regression analysis in order to evaluate prognostic factors for bleeding. In addition, the recently developed Utrecht bleeding risk score and Landefeld bleeding risk index were evaluated prospectively.Major bleeding occurred in 4 patients (2.1%) and minor bleeding in 101 patients (53.7%). For all (major and minor combined) bleeding, body surface area < or = 2 m2 (odds ratio 2.3, 95% CI 1.2-4.4; p = 0.01), and malignancy (odds ratio 2.4, 95% CI 1.1-4.9; p = 0.02) were confirmed to be independent risk factors. An increased treatment-related risk of bleeding was observed in patients treated with high doses of heparin, independent of the concomitant activated partial thromboplastin time ratios. Both bleeding risk scores had low diagnostic value for bleeding in this sample of mainly minor bleeders.A small body surface area and malignancy were associated with a higher frequency of bleeding. The bleeding risk scores merely offer the clinician a general estimation of the risk of bleeding. In patients with a small body surface area or in patients with malignancy, it may be of interest to study whether limited dose reduction of the anticoagulant drug may cause less bleeding without affecting efficacy.Warfarin thromboprophylaxis in cancer patients with central venous catheters (WARP): an open-label randomised trial.The role and dose of anticoagulants in thromboprophylaxis for patients with cancer receiving chemotherapy through central venous catheters (CVCs) is controversial. We therefore assessed whether warfarin reduces catheter-related thrombosis compared with no warfarin and whether the dose of warfarin determines the thromboprophylactic effect.In 68 clinical centres in the UK, we randomly assigned 1590 patients aged at least 16 years with cancer who were receiving chemotherapy through CVCs to no warfarin, fixed-dose warfarin 1 mg per day, or dose-adjusted warfarin per day to maintain an international normalised ratio between 1.5 and 2.0. Clinicians who were certain of the benefit of warfarin randomly assigned patients to fixed-dose or dose-adjusted warfarin groups. The primary outcome was the rate of radiologically proven, symptomatic catheter-related thrombosis. Analysis was by intention to treat. This trial is registered as an International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial, number ISRCTN 50312145.Compared with no warfarin (n=404), warfarin (n=408; 324 [79%] on fixed-dose and 84 [21%] on dose-adjusted) did not reduce the rate of catheter-related thromboses (24 [6%] vs 24 [6%]; relative risk 0.99, 95% CI 0.57-1.72, p=0.98). However, compared with fixed-dose warfarin (n=471), dose-adjusted warfarin (n=473) was superior in the prevention of catheter-related thromboses (13 [3%] vs 34 [7%]; 0.38, 0.20-0.71, p=0.002). Major bleeding events were rare; an excess was noted with warfarin compared with no warfarin (7 vs 1, p=0.07) and with dose-adjusted warfarin compared with fixed-dose warfarin (16 vs 7, p=0.09). A combined endpoint of thromboses and major bleeding showed no difference between comparisons. We did not note a survival benefit in either comparison.The findings show that prophylactic warfarin compared with no warfarin is not associated with a reduction in symptomatic catheter-related or other thromboses in patients with cancer and therefore we should consider newer treatments.Medical Research Council and Cancer Research UK.Dalteparin thromboprophylaxis in cancer patients at high risk for venous thromboembolism: A randomized trial.Ambulatory cancer patients at high-risk for venous thromboembolism (VTE) can be identified using a validated risk score (Khorana score). We evaluated the benefit of outpatient thromboprophylaxis with dalteparin in high-risk patients in a multicenter randomized study.Cancer patients with Khorana score≥3 starting a new systemic regimen were screened for VTE and if negative randomized to dalteparin 5000units daily or observation for 12weeks. Subjects were screened with lower extremity ultrasounds every 4weeks on study and with chest CT at 12weeks. The primary efficacy endpoint was all VTE over 12weeks and primary safety endpoint was clinically relevant bleeding events over 13weeks. The study was terminated early due to low accrual.Of 117 enrolled patients, 10 (8.5%) had VTE on baseline screening and were not randomized. Of 98 randomized patients, VTE occurred in 12% (N=6/50) of patients on dalteparin and 21% (N=10/48) on observation (hazard ratio, HR 0.69, 95% CI 0.23-1.89). Major bleeding was similar (N=1) in each arm but clinically relevant bleeding was higher in dalteparin arm (N=7 versus 1 on observation) (HR=7.0, 95% CI 1.2-131.6). There was no difference in overall survival.Thromboprophylaxis is associated with a non-significantly reduced risk of VTE and significantly increased risk of clinically relevant bleeding in this underpowered study. The Khorana score successfully identifies patients with high incidence of VTE both at baseline and during treatment. Future studies should continue to focus on risk-adapted approaches to reduce the burden of VTE in cancer.clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT00876915.Thromboembolic complications related to indwelling central venous catheters in children.Thrombosis is one of the most frequent complications of indwelling central venous catheters. During the past year, new information has emerged regarding the incidence and predisposing factors of thromboembolic complications of indwelling central venous catheters. Because indwelling central venous catheters are widely used, it is important to be aware of new information regarding thromboembolic complications of these devices.Recent studies have better defined the risks of thromboembolic complications in patients with cancer with indwelling central venous catheters. Acquired hypercoagulable disorders such as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, antiphospholipid syndrome, and therapy with asparaginase are associated with thromboembolic disorders in patients with indwelling central venous catheters. Studies analyzing the association between inherited hypercoagulable disorders and thrombosis have shown conflicting results. Preliminary studies suggest that low molecular weight heparins could have a role in the prevention of catheter-related thromboembolic disorders. Nevertheless, larger prospective studies will be necessary to determine the role of anticoagulants in the prevention of thromboembolic disorders in patients with cancer with indwelling central venous catheters.Recent reports will facilitate the evaluation and risk assessment of children with cancer who have indwelling central venous catheters. Despite these advances, large, controlled studies focusing on specific populations of patients, such as children, should be undertaken to determine the true performance and optimal use of indwelling central venous catheters. Future studies should also address better ways to prevent catheter-related thrombosis and infection.Prophylactic urokinase in the management of long-term venous access devices in children: a Children's Oncology Group study.Infection and thrombosis are serious complications of long-term vascular access devices in children undergoing chemotherapy. Since routine fibrinolytic therapy may decrease these complications, the purpose of this study was to compare the efficacy of an every-2-week administration of urokinase with standard heparin flushes in reducing the incidence of device-related infections and occlusions.This study was a prospective, randomized phase III multicenter trial conducted by the Children's Cancer Group, in which patients with implantable ports or tunneled catheters received either urokinase or heparin every 2 weeks for 12 months. Study end points were time to first occlusion or time to first device-related infection.Five hundred seventy-seven patients from 29 institutions were enrolled, of whom 51% had external catheters and 49% had ports. Urokinase administration resulted in fewer occlusive events than heparin (23% v 31%; P =.02), a longer time to first occlusive event (log-rank analysis, P =.006), and a 1.6-fold difference in the rate of occlusive events (Poisson regression, P =.003). Similar results were noted when comparing ports and tunneled catheters. The urokinase group also had a 1.4-fold difference in the rate of infection (Poisson regression, P =.05) and longer time to first infection (log-rank, P =.07), but the difference was significant only in tunneled catheters.Urokinase administration every 2 weeks significantly affects the rate of occlusive events in ports and tunneled catheters and of infectious events in external catheters compared with heparin administration.Thrombosis prophylaxis in patient populations with a central venous catheter: a systematic review.Central venous catheters (CVCs) are used in a wide variety of patients. Associated complications are thrombosis and infection. It is a matter of debate whether thromboprophylaxis is beneficial.We performed a systematic review of 3 different patient populations to render the available information in the literature more accessible to clinical practice: patients receiving parenteral nutrition (PN), patients with cancer, and patients admitted to intensive care units.Prophylaxis with heparin added to PN was found to give a nonsignificant reduction in the incidence of catheter-related thrombosis (pooled relative risk of randomized studies, 0.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.11-5.48). In cancer patients, both low-dose warfarin and low-molecular-weight heparin significantly reduced the incidence of catheter-related thrombosis (relative risk of randomized studies, 0.25 [95% CI, 0.09-0.70] and 0.10 [95% CI, 0.01-0.71], respectively). So far, intensive care patients have hardly been studied with respect to thromboprophylaxis and the incidence of CVC thrombosis. Any effect of the type of catheter could not be established because of small numbers. There was no apparent increase in bleeding events with prophylactic anticoagulation in patients with CVCs.In the small number of patients studied, the addition of heparin to PN did not significantly decrease the risk of catheter-related thrombosis, whereas warfarin and dalteparin did decrease the thrombosis risk in cancer patients with CVCs. There is no apparent increase in bleeding events with prophylactic anticoagulants in patients with CVCs.Prediction and prevention of thromboembolic events with enoxaparin in cancer patients with elevated tissue factor-bearing microparticles: a randomized-controlled phase II trial (the Microtec study).Elevated levels of circulating tissue factor-bearing microparticles (TFMP) have been associated with an increased risk of developing venous thromboembolism (VTE) in cancer patients. We performed a randomized phase II study to evaluate the cumulative incidence of VTE in advanced cancer patients with lower levels of TFMP not receiving thromboprophylaxis and those with higher levels of circulating TFMP randomized to enoxaparin or observation. The cumulative incidence of VTE at 2 months in the higher TFMP group randomized to enoxaparin (N = 23) was 5·6% while the higher TFMP group observation arm (N = 11) was 27·3% (Gray test P = 0·06). The cumulative incidence of VTE in the low TFMP was 7·2% (N = 32). No major haemorrhages were observed in the enoxaparin arm. The median survival for patients with higher levels of TFMP followed by observation was 11·8 months compared with 17·8 months on enoxaparin (P = 0·58). In a prospective randomized trial, increased numbers of circulating TFMP detected by impedance flow cytometry identified cancer patients with a high incidence of VTE. Enoxaparin demonstrated a clear trend towards reducing the rate of VTE in patients with elevated levels of TFMP, with an overall rate of VTE similar in magnitude to the lower TFMP group.Thrombosis, markers of thrombotic risk, indwelling central venous catheters and antithrombotic prophylaxis using low-dose warfarin in subjects with malignant disease.Markers of thrombotic risk--fibrinogen, factor VIII and immunoglobulin G (IgG) anticardiolipin titres--were measured, and the presence of lupus anticoagulant and factor V Leiden were assessed in 84 patients with a solid or haematological malignancy. These patients were monitored, following the insertion of an indwelling venous catheter, for thrombosis. Fifty-five were given prophylactic low-dose warfarin. Over a mean of 15 weeks there were 10 (12%) thrombotic events in 10 patients. Seven were on warfarin. Haemorrhagic problems occurred in three (5%), all on warfarin. Of the 84 patients, 86% had raised fibrinogen levels, 37% elevated factor VIII and 44% raised anticardiolipin levels. Lupus anticoagulant was present in five and three were heterozygous for factor V Leiden. A high prevalence of a range of prothrombotic changes was confirmed and the frequent presence of low-titre anticardiolipin antibody in subjects with malignancy demonstrated. However, none of these parameters predicted the development of thrombosis (P > 0.05).Efficacy and safety of enoxaparin in Japanese patients undergoing curative abdominal or pelvic cancer surgery: results from a multicenter, randomized, open-label study.Enoxaparin sodium (enoxaparin) is used worldwide for the prevention of venous thromboembolism (VTE). Registration trials of enoxaparin have been conducted primarily in Caucasian populations, and its preventive use in Japanese patients has yet to be established. To address this, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of postoperative enoxaparin in Japanese patients undergoing surgery for abdominal cancer.This multicenter, open-label study randomized 151 Japanese patients undergoing curative surgery for abdominal cancer to enoxaparin 20mg twice daily for 14 days, started 24-36 hours after surgery (n=113) or intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) as a reference (n=38). IPC was performed at least once in both groups between randomization and surgery. The primary efficacy endpoint was the incidence of VTE in the modified intention-to-treat (mITT) population. The primary safety outcome was the incidence of any bleeding during treatment and follow-up.Incidence of VTE was 1.2% (95% CI, 0.03-6.53%) (1/83 patients) in the enoxaparin group and 19.4% (95% CI, 7.45-37.47%) (6/31 patients) in the IPC group. In the safety population, 10/109 patients in the enoxaparin group (9.2%; 95% CI, 4.49-16.23%) and 3/38 patients in the IPC group (7.9%; 95% CI, 1.66-21.38%) experienced a bleeding event. There were no cases of fatal bleeding or bleeding into any critical organ.These favorable efficacy and safety data support the use of enoxaparin (20mg twice daily for 14 days started 24-36 hours after surgery) in Japanese patients undergoing abdominal or pelvic cancer surgery.Oral rivaroxaban versus enoxaparin with vitamin K antagonist for the treatment of symptomatic venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer (EINSTEIN-DVT and EINSTEIN-PE): a pooled subgroup analysis of two randomised controlled trials.Patients with venous thromboembolism and cancer have a substantial risk of recurrent venous thromboembolism and bleeding during anticoagulant therapy. Although monotherapy with low-molecular-weight heparin is recommended in these patients, in clinical practice many patients with venous thromboembolism and cancer do not receive this treatment. We aimed to assess the efficacy and safety of a single-drug regimen with oral rivaroxaban compared with enoxaparin followed by vitamin K antagonists, in the subgroup of patients with cancer enrolled in the EINSTEIN-DVT and EINSTEIN-PE randomised controlled trials.We did a subgroup analysis of patients with active cancer (either at baseline or diagnosed during the study), a history of cancer, or no cancer who were enrolled in the EINSTEIN-DVT and EINSTEIN-PE trials. Eligible patients with deep-vein thrombosis (EINSTEIN-DVT) or pulmonary embolism (EINSTEIN-PE) were randomly assigned in a 1:1 ratio to receive rivaroxaban (15 mg twice daily for 21 days, followed by 20 mg once daily) or standard therapy (enoxaparin 1·0 mg/kg twice daily and warfarin or acenocoumarol; international normalised ratio 2·0-3·0). Randomisation with a computerised voice-response system was stratified according to country and intended treatment duration (3, 6, or 12 months). The prespecified primary efficacy and safety outcomes of both the trials and this subanalysis were symptomatic recurrent venous thromboembolism and clinically relevant bleeding, respectively. We did efficacy and mortality analyses in the intention-to-treat population, and bleeding analyses for time spent receiving treatment plus 2 days in the safety population (all patients who received at least one dose of study drug). The EINSTEIN-DVT and EINSTEIN-PE studies are registered at ClinicalTrials.gov, numbers NCT00440193 and NCT00439777.In patients with active cancer (diagnosed at baseline or during treatment), recurrent venous thromboembolism occurred in 16 (5%) of 354 patients allocated to rivaroxaban and 20 (7%) of 301 patients allocated to enoxaparin and vitamin K antagonist (hazard ratio [HR] 0·67, 95% CI 0·35 to 1·30). Clinically relevant bleeding occurred in 48 (14%) of 353 patients receiving rivaroxaban and in 49 (16%) of 298 patients receiving standard therapy (HR 0·80, 95% CI 0·54 to 1·20). Major bleeding occurred in eight (2%) of 353 patients receiving rivaroxaban and in 15 (5%) of 298 patients receiving standard therapy (HR 0·42, 95% CI 0·18 to 0·99). The overall frequency of recurrent venous thromboembolism in patients with only a history of cancer (five [2%] of 233 patients in the rivaroxaban group vs five [2%] of 236 in the standard therapy group; HR 0·98, 95% CI 0·28-3·43) was similar to that of patients without cancer (65 [2%] of 3563 vs 70 [2%] of 3594, respectively; HR 0·93, 95% CI 0·66-1·30), but the frequency was increased in patients with active cancer at baseline (six [2%] of 258 vs eight [4%] of 204, respectively; HR 0·62, 95% CI 0·21-1·79) and most markedly increased in patients whose diagnosis of cancer was made during the study (ten [10%] of 96 vs 12 [12%] of 97, respectively; HR 0·80, 95% CI 0·34-1·88). The overall frequency of major bleeding in patients with only a history of cancer (one [<1%] patient in the rivaroxaban group vs four [2%] patients in the standard therapy group; HR 0·23, 95% CI 0·03-2·06) was similar to that of patients without cancer (31 [1%] vs 53 [1%], respectively; HR 0·58, 95% CI 0·37-0·91), but was increased in patients with active cancer at baseline (five [2%] vs eight [4%], respectively; HR 0·47, 95% CI 0·15-1·45) and was highest in those with cancer diagnosed during the study (three [3%] vs seven [7%], respectively; HR 0·33, 95% CI 0·08-1·31).In patients with active cancer and venous thromboembolism, rivaroxaban had similar efficacy to prevent recurrence of venous thromboembolism and reduced the number major bleeding events compared with treatment with enoxaparin and a vitamin K antagonist, although there was no difference between groups for clinically relevant bleeding. Based on these results, a head-to-head comparison of rivaroxaban with long-term low-molecular-weight heparin in patients with cancer is warranted.Bayer HealthCare Pharmaceuticals and Janssen Research & Development.Lack of efficacy of twice-weekly urokinase in the prevention of complications associated with Hickman catheters: a multicentre randomised comparison of urokinase versus heparin.Hickman catheters (HC) are associated with complications, in particular infection, occlusion and thrombosis. We tested the hypothesis that regular flushing of catheters with urokinase would reduce the frequency of these complications. Patients who required a double-lumen HC for (1) bone marrow or peripheral blood progenitor cell transplantation or (2) intensive combination chemotherapy for haematological malignancies were randomised to receive twice-weekly flushes of either urokinase (5000 units) or heparin (50 units). HC-survival analysis was determined by Cox regression. 100 patients were enrolled (urokinase=52; heparin=48) and treated for a mean of 8.5 weeks. No significant difference was observed in the incidence of HC-associated septicaemic events, which occurred in 8/52 in the urokinase group and 9/48 in the heparin group (actuarial incidence 20% versus 25%, P=0.50). Similarly, there was no differences in the incidence of exit site infections (urokinase=27/52 and heparin=28/48, P=0.122); HC-septic thromboses (urokinase=2/52 and heparin=4/48, P=0.34); lumen occlusion (urokinase=30/52 and heparin=30/48, P=0.681); or venous thrombosis (urokinase=8/52 and heparin=6/48, P=0.726). Overall, a high incidence of HC-related complications was seen in both groups; 40/52 in the urokinase group and 40/48 in the heparin group (actuarial incidence 80% versus 90%, P=0.367). Despite this only 18% of HC required early removal due to complications (urokinase=8, heparin=10). There was no difference in the incidence of complications in patients undergoing transplantation (n=68) compared with chemotherapy alone (n=32). Patients with haematological malignancies were more likely to have HC-related infective complications (P=0.006), and patients with solid tumours more likely to have venous thrombosis (P=0.027). The cumulative incidence of HC-related complications in this prospective study was higher than in previously reported series. Urokinase did not appear effective in reducing the frequency of these complications.Low-molecular-weight heparin (nadroparin) and very low doses of warfarin in the prevention of upper extremity thrombosis in cancer patients with indwelling long-term central venous catheters: a pilot randomized trial.Upper extremity thrombosis is a major complication of central venous catheters implanted for chemotherapy in cancer patients. Vitamin K antagonists and low-molecular-weight heparins have been recommended in this setting, but their relative benefit-to-risk ratios have never been compared.A prospective, randomized, open, parallel-group, multicenter trial was performed comparing the antithrombotic efficacy and safety of warfarin and the low-molecular-weight heparin, nadroparin, in cancer patients who had undergone central venous catheter implantation. Warfarin was given orally at a fixed daily dose of 1 mg and nadroparin was injected subcutaneously at a fixed daily dose of 2,850 IU for 90 days, or until venographically-confirmed thrombosis occurred. The primary efficacy outcome was the occurrence of upper extremity thrombosis confirmed by venography performed 90 days after insertion of the catheter, or earlier if symptoms of thrombosis had appeared. Safety end-points were bleeding and thrombocytopenia.Fifty-nine patients were included in the study. A total of 21 and 24 patients in the nadroparin and warfarin groups, respectively, were evaluable for primary efficacy. Six out of the 21 patients in the nadroparin group (28.6%) and 4 out of the 24 patients in the warfarin group (16.7%) had venographically-documented upper extremity thrombosis at day 90 (p=0.48). Safety was satisfactory and similar with both treatments.Warfarin at a fixed, very low dose and nadroparin at a fixed, prophylactic dose had comparable benefit-to-risk ratios in the prevention of thrombosis associated with central venous catheters in cancer patients.Prevention of venous thromboembolism in medical patients with enoxaparin: a subgroup analysis of the MEDENOX study.The Medical Patients with Enoxaparin (MEDENOX) trial was a randomized, placebo-controlled study that defined the risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) in acutely ill, immobilized, general medical patients and the efficacy of the low-molecular-weight heparin, enoxaparin, in preventing thrombosis. We performed a post-hoc analysis to evaluate the effect of 40 mg enoxaparin once daily on MEDENOX patient outcome in different types of acute medical illness (heart failure, respiratory failure, infection, rheumatic disorder and inflammatory bowel disease) and pre-defined risk factors (chronic heart and chronic respiratory failure, age, immobility, previous VTE and cancer). The primary outcome was the occurrence of documented VTE between days 1 and 14. The relative risk reduction [95% confidence intervals (CI)] for VTE comparing 40 mg enoxaparin with placebo in the subgroups were: acute heart failure, 0.29 (95% CI, 0.10-0.84); acute respiratory failure, 0.25 (95% CI, 0.10-0.65); acute infectious disease, 0.28 (95% CI, 0.09-0.81); and acute rheumatic disorder, 0.48 (95% CI, 0.11-2.16). The relative risk reduction for VTE in the pre-defined risk factor subgroups were: chronic heart failure, 0.26 (95% CI, 0.08-0.92); chronic respiratory failure, 0.26 (95% CI, 0.10-0.68); age, 0.22 (95% CI, 0.09-0.51); immobility, 0.53 (95% CI, 0.14-1.72); previous VTE, 0.49 (95% CI, 0.15-1.68); and cancer, 0.50 (95%o CI, 0.14-1.72). The beneficial effects of enoxaparin extend to a wide range of acutely ill medical patients.A randomized trial of low-dose heparin and intermittent pneumatic calf compression for the prevention of deep venous thrombosis after gynecologic oncology surgery.Our aim was to determine the relative efficacy and complications of low-dose heparin and intermittent pneumatic calf compression for the prevention of postoperative venous thrombosis in patients undergoing surgery for gynecologic malignancy.Randomized trial comparing 107 patients treated with low-dose heparin to 101 patients treated with intermittent pneumatic calf compression was performed. All patients were evaluated with iodine-125 fibrinogen scanning of the legs. Clinical and laboratory variables associated with bleeding complications were recorded prospectively.Venous thrombosis was diagnosed in seven patients receiving low-dose heparin and in four receiving intermittent pneumatic calf compression (p = 0.54). Low-dose heparin patients received more blood transfusions postoperatively (p = 0.02), had increased volume of retroperitoneal drainage (p = 0.02), and the activated partial thromboplastin time was more frequently prolonged (p = 0.001).Low-dose heparin and intermittent pneumatic calf compression provide similar reduction in reducing the incidence of postoperative venous thrombosis. However, low-dose heparin is more frequently associated with postoperative bleeding complications.The use of extended perioperative low molecular weight heparin (tinzaparin) to improve disease-free survival following surgical resection of colon cancer: a pilot randomized controlled trial.Biofilm formation in long-term central venous catheters in children with cancer: a randomized controlled open-labelled trial of taurolidine versus heparin.Taurolidine has demonstrated inhibition of biofilm formation in vitro. The aim of this study was to compare the effect of catheter locking with taurolidine vs heparin in biofilm formation in central venous catheters. Forty-eight children with cancer were randomized to catheter locking by heparin (n = 22) or taurolidine (n = 26), respectively. After removal, catheters were examined by standardized scanning electron microscopy to assess quantitative biofilm formation. Biofilm was present if morphologically typical structures and bacterial cells were identified. Quantitative and semi-quantitative cultures were also performed. Biofilm was identified in 23 of 26 catheters from the taurolidine group and 21 of 22 catheters from the heparin group. A positive culture was made of six of the catheters locked with taurolidine and heparin, respectively (p = 0.78). The rate of catheter-related bloodstream infections (CRBSI) was 0.1 per 1000 catheter-days using taurolidine and 0.9 per 1000 catheter-days using heparin (p = 0.03). This randomized trial confirmed that the use of taurolidine as catheter-lock compared with heparin reduced the rate of CRBSIs; this reduction was not related to a reduction in the intraluminal biofilm formation and the rate of bacterial colonization detected by scanning electron microscopy in the two groups.Treatment with dabigatran or warfarin in patients with venous thromboembolism and cancer.The efficacy and safety of dabigatran for treatment of venous thromboembolism (VTE) were demonstrated in two trials. It is unclear if the results pertain to patients with cancer and VTE. Data from two randomised trials comparing dabigatran and warfarin for acute VTE were pooled. Primary efficacy outcome was symptomatic recurrent VTE and related death from randomisation to the end of the treatment period. Safety outcomes were major, major and clinically relevant non-major, and any bleeding during the oral-only treatment period. Patients with active cancer (=within 5 years) at baseline or diagnosed during the study were analysed. Compared with 4,772 patients without cancer, recurrent VTE occurred more frequently in 335 patients with cancer at any time (hazard ratio [HR] 3.3; 95 % confidence interval [CI], 2.1-5.3) and more often in 114 with cancer diagnosed during the study compared to 221 with cancer at baseline (HR 2.6; 95 % CI, 1.1-6.2). There was no significant difference in efficacy between dabigatran and warfarin for cancer at baseline (HR 0.75; 95 % CI, 0.20-2.8) or diagnosed during the study (HR 0.63; 95 % CI, 0.20-2.0). Major bleeding (HR 4.1; 95 % CI, 2.2-7.5) and any bleeding (HR 1.5; 95 % CI, 1.2-2.0) were more frequent in patients with cancer than without, but with similar incidence in cancer with dabigatran or warfarin. In conclusion, in cancer patients, dabigatran provided similar clinical benefit as warfarin. VTE recurrence or bleeding were similar in patients on dabigatran or warfarin. The efficacy of dabigatran has not been assessed in comparison with low-molecular-weight heparin.Pneumatic compression versus low molecular weight heparin in gynecologic oncology surgery: a randomized trial.To compare the efficacy and treatment-related complications of low molecular weight heparin and external pneumatic compression in the prevention of venous thromboembolism of postoperative gynecologic oncology patients.A total of 211 patients over age 40 years, undergoing a major operative procedure for gynecologic malignancy, were randomized to receive perioperative thromboembolism prophylaxis with either low molecular weight heparin (n = 105) or external pneumatic compression (n = 106). Demographic data and clinical outcome were recorded for each patient. All patients underwent bilateral Doppler ultrasound of the lower extremities on postoperative days 3-5 to evaluate for the presence of occult deep vein thrombosis. A follow-up interview 30 days after surgery sought to detect patients who developed deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism after hospital discharge.Venous thrombosis was diagnosed in two patients receiving low molecular weight heparin and in one patient receiving external pneumatic compression. The frequency of bleeding complications, measured by the number of required perioperative transfusions, and estimated intraoperative blood loss was similar between the two groups.Low molecular weight heparin and external pneumatic compression are similarly effective in the postoperative prophylaxis of thromboembolism. The use of low molecular weight heparin is not associated with an increased risk of bleeding complications when compared with external pneumatic compression. We believe that both modalities are reasonable choices for prophylaxis in this high-risk group of patients.Comparison of low molecular weight heparin (Fragmin) with sodium heparin for prophylaxis against postoperative thrombosis in women undergoing major gynaecological surgery.A randomized controlled trial was undertaken comparing the efficacy and safety of low molecular weight (LMW) heparin (Fragmin) with sodium heparin for prophylaxis against postoperative thromboembolic disease after major gynaecological surgery. Women were randomized to receive subcutaneous injections of 5,000 U of either once daily LMW heparin or twice daily sodium heparin. A total of 566 women were recruited, of whom 552 completed the study. Most women (461) had malignant disease and 430 of these underwent radical surgery. The remainder underwent major, but not radical surgery. There were 5 thromboembolic events in the LMW heparin group and 2 in the sodium heparin group, with no significant difference between these groups. No significant difference was found in the incidence of intraoperative or postoperative transfusion in the 2 groups. The decision of which heparin to use in routine practice cannot be made on clinical grounds.Rationale and design of PROSPECT-CONKO 004: a prospective, randomized trial of simultaneous pancreatic cancer treatment with enoxaparin and chemotherapy).Advanced pancreatic cancer, in addition to its high mortality, is characterized by one of the highest rates of venous thromboembolic events (VTE) as compared to other types of cancer. Enoxaparin, a low molecular weight heparin (LMWH), has proven to be effective for the prevention and treatment of VTE in surgical and general medical patients. Results of some small studies suggest that this benefit might extend to patients with cancer, however, enoxaparin is not currently indicated for this use. This phase IIb study was designed to analyze the efficacy of enoxaparin in patients with locally advanced or metastatic pancreatic cancer undergoing systemic chemotherapy.The aim of this prospective multicenter trial is to compare concomitant treatment with enoxaparin to no anticoagulation in 540 patients. Primary endpoint is the incidence of clinically relevant VTE (symptomatic deep venous thrombosis (DVT) of the leg and/or pelvic and/or pulmonary embolism (PE)) within the first 3 months. Secondary endpoints include the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic VTE after 6, 9 and 12 months as well as remission at 3, 6, 9 and 12 months, overall survival and bleeding.isrctn.org identifier CCT-NAPN-16752, controlled-trials.com identifier: ISRCTN02140505.An interim analysis for safety performed after inclusion of 152 patients revealed no increased risk of bleeding (5 pts vs. 6 pts, Chi2: 0.763).PROSPECT is a pivotal study in elucidating the role of low molecular weight heparins in advanced pancreatic cancer. Its results will lead to a new understanding of the role of heparins in the prevention of venous thromboembolism and of their effect on survival, remission rates and toxicity of chemotherapeutic regimens.Efficacy of Prophylactic Low-Molecular Weight Heparin for Ambulatory Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Cancer: Outcomes From the CONKO-004 Trial.Advanced pancreatic cancer (APC), in addition to its high mortality, accounts for the highest rates of venous thromboembolic events (VTEs). Enoxaparin, a low-molecular weight heparin, is effective in prevention and treatment of VTEs. Some small studies have indicated that this benefit might extend to patients with cancer.Patients with histologically proven APC were randomly assigned to ambulant first-line chemotherapy and prophylactic use of enoxaparin or chemotherapy alone to investigate the probable reduction in symptomatic VTEs and the impact on survival.A total of 312 patients were recruited as one of the protocol end points was reached. Within the first 3 months, the numbers of symptomatic VTEs were as follows: 15 of 152 patients in the observation group and two of 160 patients in the enoxaparin group (hazard ratio [HR], 0.12; 95% CI, 0.03 to 0.52; χ(2) P = .001). The numbers of major bleeding events were as follows: five of 152 patients in the observation arm and seven of 160 patients in the enoxaparin arm (HR, 1.4; 95% CI, 0.35 to 3.72; χ(2) P = 1.0). Overall cumulative incidence rates of symptomatic VTEs were 15.1% (observation) and 6.4% (enoxaparin; HR, 0.40; 95% CI, 0.19 to 0.83; P = .01). Progression-free (HR, 1.06; 95% CI, 0.84 to 1.32; P = .64) and overall survival (HR, 1.01; 95% CI, 0.87 to 1.38; P = .44) did not differ between groups.This study demonstrates the high efficacy and feasibility of primary pharmacologic prevention of symptomatic VTEs in outpatients with APC. Treatment efficacy was not affected by simultaneous treatment with enoxaparin in this trial setting.Low-dose warfarin for the prevention of central line-associated thromboses in children with malignancies--a randomized, controlled study.Central venous lines (CVLs) are essential in the care of children with malignancies, but are associated with venous thromboembolism (VTE) and infections. Effective and safe prophylactic approaches are deficient.To perform a study of adjusted low-dose warfarin for the prevention of CVL-related VTE in children with malignancies.Children with newly diagnosed cancer, a CVL in a jugular vein and an expected treatment period of over 6 mo were eligible for the study. Participants were randomized to low-dose warfarin, with intended international normalized ratio (INR) 1.3-1.9, or to a control group. Primary outcome was VTE in a jugular vein diagnosed by ultrasonography at 1, 3 and 6 mo after inclusion. Secondary outcome was CVL-related infections, mainly measured as days on antibiotics or positive blood cultures.The study enrolled 73 children, and 62 completed it fully. Asymptomatic CVL-related VTE was frequent (42%), but often transient. Regardless of severity, timing and duration, CVL-related VTE was equally frequent among children on warfarin as compared to controls (p=0.44). Low-dose warfarin (p=0.59) or jugular CVL-related VTE (p=0.91) did not have any impact on days on antibiotics, but we observed a tendency towards an association between CVL-related VTE and positive blood cultures (p=0.15).Our randomized study of low-dose oral anticoagulation for the prevention of CVL-related asymptomatic VTE in children with cancer did not show any benefit of warfarin adjusted to maintain INR between 1.3 and 1.9.Prophylaxis of central venous catheter-related thrombosis with minidose warfarin: analysis of its use in 427 cancer patients.In the past few years, several studies have been performed to evaluate thrombosis prophylaxis with warfarin in cancer patients with central venous catheters (CVC), but the analysis of these studies does not allow firm conclusions to be drawn.Four hundred and twenty-seven cancer patients were evaluated. Each received warfarin at a dose of 1 mg/daily as prophylaxis, starting the day after CVC positioning until its removal.The catheters were monitored for a mean of 168 days (range 22-706). There were 9 thrombotic events (1.8%). Overall, International Normalised Ratio (INR) elevation occurred in 55 (12.8%) patients. Bleeding was observed in 15 (3.5%) patients, 10 of whom had elevated INR levels. Of these, all were treated with continuous-infusion 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)-based regimens.Minidose warfarin can protect from clinical thrombosis, but can induce an alteration in INR values and/or haemorrhagic symptoms in patients being treated with 5-FU-based regimens.Heparin Study in Internal Medicine (HESIM): design and preliminary results.The Heparin Study in Internal Medicine (HESIM) compares the efficacy and safety of an unfractionated (UF) heparin with a low molecular weight (LMW) heparin (CY 216 D) for prevention of proximal deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) in medical inpatients with a high risk for development of thromboembolism. Patients are randomized and receive three times daily 5000 IU UF heparin or once daily 3100 IU LMW heparin and two placebo injections subcutaneously for 10 days. All patients are screened for the presence of proximal DVT at day 1 and 10 by real-time B-mode compression sonography and for PE by repeated clinical examinations. Perfusion scintigraphy is used for confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of PE. The study protocol includes a stratified randomization of patients on admission to the hospital according to one of the following main diagnoses: malignant disease, cardiovascular disease, bronchopulmonary disease, neurologic disease, and other diseases. The present study may serve as a model for further clinical trials in medical inpatients using the biometric approach of statistical analysis for proving equivalence of drug efficacy, and to adopt less sensitive but noninvasive methods for the detection of primary endpoints.Low rate of venous thromboembolism after craniotomy for brain tumor using multimodality prophylaxis.Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the most frequent complication following craniotomy for brain tumors. At Brigham and Women's Hospital, VTE after craniotomy for brain tumor is the leading cause of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) among patients hospitalized for conditions other than VTE.To minimize VTE among patients undergoing craniotomy for brain tumor.Randomized, prospective, double-blind clinical trial.Brigham and Women's Hospital.One hundred fifty patients undergoing craniotomy for brain tumor randomized to enoxaparin, 40 mg/d, vs heparin, 5,000 U bid, with all patients receiving graduated compression stockings and intermittent pneumatic compression.The rate of DVT detected by venous ultrasonography prior to hospital discharge.Symptomatic DVT or PE developed in none of the patients. The overall rate of asymptomatic VTE was 9.3%, with no significant difference in the rates between the two prophylaxis groups. Ten of the 14 patients identified with VTE had thrombus limited to the deep veins of the calf.Enoxaparin, 40 mg/d, or unfractionated heparin, 5,000 U bid, in combination with graduated compression stockings, intermittent pneumatic compression, and predischarge surveillance venous ultrasonography of the legs, resulted in 150 consecutive patients without symptomatic VTE. The low 9.3% frequency of asymptomatic VTE comprised mostly isolated calf DVT. Therefore, this comprehensive, multimodality approach to VTE prophylaxis achieved excellent efficacy and safety.Randomized controlled trial of enoxaparin versus intermittent pneumatic compression for venous thromboembolism prevention in Japanese surgical patients with gynecologic malignancy.The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of enoxaparin and intermittent pneumatic compression (IPC) for venous thromboembolism (VTE) prevention in Japanese surgical patients with gynecologic malignancy.Patients ≥ 40 years old undergoing major surgery for gynecologic malignancy without preoperative VTE were included. Written informed consent was obtained. Enrolled patients received IPC immediately before surgery. After surgery, they were randomly assigned to either an enoxaparin group or an IPC-alone group. The enoxaparin group received enoxaparin injection (20 mg, subcutaneous, every 12 h) from postoperative day 2 to 8. IPC was discontinued after the first injection. In the IPC-alone group, IPC was continued until full ambulation. The primary end-point was incidence of VTE, including pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis, regardless of symptoms. An interim analysis was to be conducted when the first 30 patients had completed the study protocol. A Data and Safety Monitoring Board was established for making recommendation on the continuation or termination of the study based on the interim results.At the time of the interim analysis, six cases of VTE were found: five in the IPC-alone group and one in the enoxaparin group (Fisher's exact test, P = 0.08). Three patients in the IPC-alone group developed pulmonary embolism, but none in the enoxaparin group did so (Fisher's exact test, P = 0.10). The study was terminated following the Data and Safety Monitoring Board's recommendation.Enoxaparin might have lowered the risk of VTE among surgical patients with gynecologic malignancy. Further studies are necessary to confirm this.Randomized placebo-controlled study of low-dose warfarin for the prevention of central venous catheter-associated thrombosis in patients with cancer.In this multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial, we studied whether warfarin 1 mg daily reduces the incidence of symptomatic central venous catheter (CVC) -associated thrombosis in patients with cancer.Two hundred fifty-five patients with cancer who required a CVC for at least 7 days were randomly assigned to receive warfarin 1 mg or placebo.There were 11 (4.3%) symptomatic CVC-associated thromboses among 255 patients, with no difference in the incidence of symptomatic CVC-associated thrombosis between patients taking warfarin 1 mg daily (six of 130 patients; 4.6%) and patients taking placebo (five of 125 patients; 4.0%; hazard ratio, 1.20; 95% CI, 0.37 to 3.94). Warfarin had no effect on CVC life span (84 days v 63 days in control and warfarin groups, respectively; 95% confidence limit, -16 to 55 days; P = .09), and it did not affect the number of premature CVC removals (23.2% v 25.4% in control and warfarin groups, respectively; 95% confidence limit of difference -8.34 to 12.71; P = .68) or the frequency of major bleeding episodes (2% v 0% in control and warfarin groups, respectively; P = .5, Fisher's exact test).Symptomatic CVC-associated thrombosis in patients with cancer, although significant, is less common than previously reported. In this study, the administration of warfarin 1 mg daily did not reduce the incidence of symptomatic CVC-associated thrombosis in patients with cancer. However, the low rate of symptomatic CVC-associated thrombosis means that a much larger trial is required to address this issue definitively.Extended prophylaxis with bemiparin for the prevention of venous thromboembolism after abdominal or pelvic surgery for cancer: the CANBESURE randomized study.There is not enough clinical evidence to make a strong recommendation on the optimal duration of thromboprophylaxis using low-molecular weight heparins (LMWH) in patients undergoing major cancer surgery.CANBESURE is a randomized, double-blind study which enrolled patients admitted for abdominal or pelvic surgery for cancer. They received 3500 IU of bemiparin subcutaneously once daily for 8 days and were then randomized to receive either bemiparin or placebo for 20 additional days. Bilateral venography was performed after 20 days and evaluated blinded. The primary efficacy outcome was the composite of deep vein thrombosis (DVT), non-fatal pulmonary embolism (PE) and all-cause mortality at the end of double-blind period. Major venous thromboembolism (proximal deep-vein thrombosis, non-fatal pulmonary embolism and venous thromboembolism-related deaths) was also evaluated. The primary safety outcome was major bleeding.Six hundred and twenty-five and 488 patients were included in the safety and main efficacy analyzes, respectively. The primary efficacy outcome occurred in 25 out of 248 patients (10.1%) in the bemiparin group and 32 out of 240 (13.3%) in the placebo group (relative risk reduction 24.4%; 95% CI: -23.7-53.8%; P = 0.26). At the end of double-blind period, major venous thromboembolism occurred in 2 (0.8%) and 11 (4.6%) patients, respectively (relative risk reduction 82.4%; 95% CI: 21.5-96.1%; P = 0.010). No significant difference was found in major bleedings.Four weeks compared with 1 week of prophylaxis with bemiparin after abdominal or pelvic cancer surgery did not significantly reduce the primary efficacy outcome, but decreased major venous thromboembolism (VTE) without increasing hemorrhagic complications.CATCH: a randomised clinical trial comparing long-term tinzaparin versus warfarin for treatment of acute venous thromboembolism in cancer patients.Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) is recommended and commonly used for extended treatment of cancer-associated thrombosis (CAT), but its superiority over warfarin has been demonstrated in only one randomised study. We report here the rationale, design and a priori analysis plans of Comparison of Acute Treatments in Cancer Haemostasis (CATCH; NCT01130025), a multinational, Phase III, open-label, randomised controlled trial comparing tinzaparin with warfarin for extended treatment of CAT.The primary objective is to assess the efficacy of tinzaparin in preventing recurrent venous thromboembolism (VTE) in patients with active cancer and acute, symptomatic proximal deep vein thrombosis and/or pulmonary embolism. The secondary objectives are to determine: safety of tinzaparin given over 6 months; clinical and laboratory markers for recurrent VTE and/or major bleeding; 6-month overall mortality; incidence and severity of post-thrombotic syndrome; patient-reported quality of life; and healthcare resource utilisation. Nine hundred patients are randomised to receive tinzaparin 175 IU/kg once daily for 6 months or initial tinzaparin 175 IU/kg once daily for 5-10 days and dose-adjusted warfarin (target INR 2.0-3.0) for 6 months. The primary composite outcome is time to recurrent VTE, including incidental VTE and fatal pulmonary embolism. All patients are followed up to 6 months or death, whichever comes sooner. Blinded adjudication will be performed for all reported VTE, bleeding events and causes of death. Efficacy will be analysed using centrally adjudicated results of all patients according to intention-to-treat analysis. An independent Data Safety Monitoring Board is reviewing data at regular intervals and an interim analysis is planned after 450 patients have completed the study.The results will add significantly to the knowledge of the efficacy, safety and cost effectiveness of tinzaparin in the prevention of recurrent VTE in patients with cancer and thrombosis. Prospective data will emerge on the clinical significance of incidental VTE and risk stratification in patients with CAT. Results on post-thrombotic syndrome, quality of life and healthcare resource utilisation will inform decision makers on how to secure better patient care. If tinzaparin is shown to be more effective than warfarin, CATCH will provide valuable confirmatory data to support the use of the LMWH tinzaparin for extended treatment of CAT.A randomized study on 1-week versus 4-week prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism after laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer.To compare the efficacy and safety of antithrombotic prophylaxis given for 1 week or 4 weeks in patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer.Extending antithrombotic prophylaxis beyond 1 week reduces the incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) after open abdominal surgery for cancer.In consecutive patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer, complete compression ultrasonography of the lower limbs was performed after 8 ± 2 days of antithrombotic prophylaxis. Patients with no evidence of VTE were randomized to short (heparin withdrawal) or to extended (heparin continued for 3 additional weeks) prophylaxis. Complete compression ultrasonography was repeated at day 28 ± 2 after surgery by investigators blinded to treatment allocation. The primary outcome of the study was the composite of symptomatic and ultrasonography-detected VTE at day 28 ± 2 after surgery.Overall, 301 patients were evaluated for inclusion in the study and 225 were randomized. VTE occurred in 11 of 113 patients randomized to short (9.7%) and in none of the 112 patients randomized to extended heparin prophylaxis (P = 0.001). The incidence of VTE at 3 months was 9.7% and 0.9% in patients randomized to short or to extended heparin prophylaxis, respectively (relative risk reduction: 91%, 95% confidence interval: 30%-99%; P = 0.005). The rate of bleeding was similar in the 2 treatment groups. Two patients died during the study period, 1 in each treatment group.After laparoscopic surgery for colorectal cancer, extended antithrombotic prophylaxis is safe and reduces the risk for VTE as compared with 1-week prophylaxis (NCT01589146).Risk factors for upper limb deep vein thrombosis associated with the use of central vein catheter in cancer patients.Deep vein thrombosis of upper limb is a common complication of CVC in patients with cancer. In these patients the risk factors for CVC-related thrombosis are not completely defined. The purpose of this study was to identify the risk factors for CVC-related thrombosis in patients included in a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study aimed at assessing the efficacy and safety of enoxaparin for the prophylaxis of CVC-related thrombosis. CVC-related thrombosis was screened by mandatory venography after 6 weeks of study treatment. A number of patient baseline characteristics were assessed as potential risk factors for CVC-related deep vein thrombosis. Crude associations between risk factors and clinical outcomes were assessed by chi(2) test or Fisher's exact test. Multiple logistic regression analysis was used to identify independent risk factors. A CVC-related thrombosis was found in 50 out of 310 patients (16.1%). At multiple logistic regression analysis, CVC tip misplaced in the upper half of superior vena cava (OR 4.05, 95%CI 1.64-10.02), left-sided CVC insertion (OR 2.29, 95%CI 1.01-5.51) and chest radiotherapy (OR 7.01, 95%CI 1.42-34.66) were independent risk factors for thrombosis. In addition to these risk factors, the presence of distant metastases (OR 9.36, 95%CI 1.53-57.05) increased the risk of thrombosis in patients who received placebo. An inadequate position of the CVC tip, left-sided CVC insertion and chest radiotherapy are independent risk factors for CVC-related thrombosis in cancer patients. Patients with distant metastases have an increased risk for thrombosis in absence of antithrombotic prophylaxis.Minidose (1 mg) warfarin as prophylaxis for central vein catheter thrombosis.Central vein catheters, which are used in the treatment of cancer patients, are prone to thrombotic complications of the catheter or adjacent vein. Previous studies suggest that 1 mg warfarin daily (minidose) can significantly reduce that risk.This, study aims to establish whether minidose warfarin could reduce catheter-related thrombosis in adult patients with haematological malignancies.Patients were randomly selected to receive warfarin or not. The end-points studied were: (i) occlusion by thrombus, (ii) removal of catheter for other reasons or (iii) 90 days free of thrombus.There was no significant difference in the incidence of catheter thrombosis or venous thrombosis and no significant variation in catheter survival between the study and control groups.This study found no benefit of the routine use of minidose warfarin for prophylaxis of central vein' catheter thrombosis in patients with haematological malignancies and therefore does not support the routine use of minidose warfarin for prophylaxis in such patients.Prevention of central venous catheter associated thrombosis using minidose warfarin in patients with haematological malignancies.Thrombosis is a well-recognized complication following insertion of central venous catheters and is associated with significant morbidity. In an attempt to reduce line-associated thrombosis, 108 consecutive patients with haematological malignancies were commenced on prophylactic 'minidose' warfarin, 1 mg/d, at the time of line insertion. This group of patients were compared with a historic group of 115 consecutive patients who had not received warfarin. Clinically-suspected venous thrombosis was confirmed by Doppler ultrasound or venography. Patients taking prophylactic warfarin had their prothrombin time measured three times per week with the aim of maintaining an INR <1.6. Five (5%) of the 108 patients who received minidose warfarin developed a thrombosis, at a median of 72 d (range 5-166) from the time of catheter insertion. In the 115 patients who were not anticoagulated 15 (13%) developed a catheter-associated thrombosis at a median of 16 d (range 1-35). There was a significant reduction in line-associated thrombosis in patients receiving warfarin (P=0.03). These data suggest that minidose warfarin reduces the incidence of central venous catheter related thrombosis in patients with haematological malignancies.Hickman catheter clots: a common occurrence despite daily heparin flushing.Central vein thrombosis is the major Hickman catheter complication in our patient population. After noting clots attached to the disposable infusion plug of these catheters, we prospectively determined whether the presence of clots indicated a high-risk group for thrombosis. Forty-three patients (41 with solid tumor, two with acute leukemia) were studied. Catheters were flushed daily with heparin (10 units/ml), and urokinase (5000-10,000 units) was injected when blood could not be drawn. Clots within the catheter lumen were detected visually after expressing, onto a 4 X 4-inch gauze pad, the first 5-10 ml of admixed blood and flush solution or iv infusion fluid drawn from the catheter prior to blood drawing. Clots were detected in 153 of 508 specimens (30%). Forty of 43 patients had clots, varying in length from fragments to 5 cm, in at least one specimen. Inpatients and outpatients had a similar percentage of clotted specimens. Eight patients developed clinical (six) or autopsy-proven (two) thrombosis. There was no difference between patients with and without thrombosis in percent of discards positive for clots. This study indicates that clots are frequently present in the lumina of Hickman catheters. It is likely that these clots embolize to the lungs when catheters are flushed. Consequences of embolization are unknown.Enoxaparin for the prevention of venous thromboembolism associated with central vein catheter: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study in cancer patients.The extent of venous thromboembolism (VTE) associated with central vein catheters (CVC) in cancer patients remains unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the low molecular weight heparin, enoxaparin, in the prevention of VTE.In a multicenter, double-blind study, consecutive cancer patients scheduled for CVC insertion were randomly assigned to receive either subcutaneous enoxaparin 40 mg once a day or placebo. Treatment was started 2 hours before CVC insertion and continued for 6 weeks. The primary end points of the study were deep vein thrombosis (DVT), confirmed by venography of the CVC limb performed 6 weeks after randomization, or clinically overt pulmonary embolism, confirmed by objective testing during the study drug administration. Patients were assessed for bleeding complications.Three hundred eighty-five patients were randomized, of which 321 (83.4%) underwent venography. A venography was adequate for adjudication in 155 patients in each treatment group. A DVT was observed in 22 patients (14.1%) treated with enoxaparin and in 28 patients (18.0%) treated with placebo, corresponding to a relative risk of 0.78 (95% CI, 0.47 to 1.31). No major bleeding occurred. Five patients (2.6%) in the enoxaparin group and two patients (1.0%) in the placebo group died during the treatment period.In this study, no difference in the rate of CVC-related VTE was detected between patients receiving enoxaparin and patients receiving placebo. The dose of enoxaparin used in this study proved to be safe. Clinical trials evaluating higher enoxaparin doses could optimize the efficacy of this agent for this indication.Prevention of catheter-related venous thrombosis with nadroparin in patients receiving chemotherapy for hematologic malignancies: a randomized, placebo-controlled study.Hemato-oncology patients treated with intensive chemotherapy usually require the placement of a central venous catheter (CVC). CVCs are frequently complicated by catheter-related central venous thrombosis (CVT), which has been associated with an increased risk of pulmonary embolism and catheter-related infection.To determine the efficacy and safety of thromboprophylaxis with s.c. low-molecular-weight heparin (nadroparin) administered once daily in a randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind trial in patients with hematologic malignancies.Consecutive patients with hematologic malignancies requiring intensive chemotherapy including autologous stem cell transplantation were eligible. The patients were randomized to receive nadroparin 2850 antifactor Xa units once daily or placebo s.c. for 3 weeks. Venography was performed on day 21 after CVC insertion. Secondary outcomes were bleeding and catheter-related infection.In total, 113 patients were randomized to nadroparin or placebo, and 87 patients (77%) underwent venography. In total, 11 venographically proven catheter-related CVTs were diagnosed. The frequency of catheter-related CVT was not significantly different between study groups, namely four catheter-related CVTs in the placebo group [9%; 95% CI: 0.002-0.16] vs. seven catheter-related CVTs in the nadroparin group (17%; 95% CI: 0.06-0.28). In addition, no difference in the incidence of catheter-related infection or bleeding was observed between the groups.This study showed that the actual risk for catheter-related CVT in patients with hematologic malignancies is lower than suggested in earlier studies in cancer patients. Although prophylactic administration of nadroparin appeared to be safe in this group of patients with a high risk of bleeding, it cannot be recommended for the prevention of catheter-related CVT or catheter-related infection in patients with hematologic malignancies.Use of heparin versus lepirudin flushes to prevent withdrawal occlusion of central venous access devices.To determine whether lepirudin flushes are more effective than heparinized saline in preventing withdrawal occlusion of central venous access devices.Randomized, double-blind clinical trial.Research institution-tertiary referral center.Forty-nine adults undergoing bone marrow transplantation for hematologic malignancies or metastatic solid tumors.Twenty-four patients received heparin and 25 received lepirudin flushes. The heparin dose was 3 ml of porcine heparin 100 U/ml (300 U) per catheter lumen at least once/day; the lepirudin dose was 3 ml of lepirudin 100 microg/ml (300 microg) per catheter lumen at least once/day. After 3-4 weeks, all 49 patients received the heparin flushes.Efficacy was assessed by the frequency with which the patients were treated with alteplase instillations for withdrawal occlusion of their central venous access devices during the first 4 months of catheterization. Three (12.5%) patients treated with heparin alone and five (20%) treated initially with lepirudin required alteplase instillations for an estimated relative risk with lepirudin versus heparin of 1.6 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.40-13.86, p=0.70).Lepirudin was not more effective than heparin, which may have been related to the conservative dose of lepirudin administered. However, higher lepirudin doses are likely to incur an unacceptable risk of systemic anticoagulation.Oral apixaban for the treatment of venous thromboembolism in cancer patients: results from the AMPLIFY trial.The AMPLIFY trial compared apixaban with enoxaparin followed by warfarin for the treatment of acute venous thromboembolism (VTE).To perform a subgroup analysis to compare the efficacy and safety of apixaban and enoxaparin followed by warfarin for the treatment of VTE in patients with cancer enrolled in AMPLIFY.Patients with symptomatic VTE were randomized to a 6-month course of apixaban or enoxaparin followed by warfarin. The primary efficacy outcome and principal safety outcome were recurrent VTE or VTE-related death and major bleeding, respectively.Of the 5395 patients randomized, 169 (3.1%) had active cancer at baseline, and 365 (6.8%) had a history of cancer without active cancer at baseline. Among patients with active cancer, recurrent VTE occurred in 3.7% and 6.4% of evaluable patients in the apixaban and enoxaparin/warfarin groups, respectively (relative risk [RR] 0.56, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.13-2.37); major bleeding occurred in 2.3% and 5.0% of evaluable patients, respectively (RR 0.45, 95% CI 0.08-2.46). Among patients with a history of cancer, recurrent VTE occurred in 1.1% and 6.3% of evaluable patients in the apixaban and enoxaparin/warfarin groups, respectively (RR 0.17, 95% CI 0.04-0.78); major bleeding occurred in 0.5% and 2.8% of treated patients, respectively (RR 0.20, 95% CI 0.02-1.65).The results of this subgroup analysis suggest that apixaban is a convenient option for cancer patients with VTE. However, additional studies are needed to confirm this concept and to compare apixaban with low molecular weight heparin in these patients.