Strategies to enhance venous thromboprophylaxis in hospitalized medical patients (SENTRY): a pilot cluster randomized trial.Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common preventable cause of mortality in hospitalized medical patients. Despite rigorous randomized trials generating strong recommendations for anticoagulant use to prevent VTE, nearly 40% of medical patients receive inappropriate thromboprophylaxis. Knowledge-translation strategies are needed to bridge this gap.We conducted a 16-week pilot cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT) to determine the proportion of medical patients that were appropriately managed for thromboprophylaxis (according to the American College of Chest Physician guidelines) within 24 hours of admission, through the use of a multicomponent knowledge-translation intervention. Our primary goal was to determine the feasibility of conducting this study on a larger scale. The intervention comprised clinician education, a paper-based VTE risk assessment algorithm, printed physicians' orders, and audit and feedback sessions. Medical wards at six hospitals (representing clusters) in Ontario, Canada were included; three were randomized to the multicomponent intervention and three to usual care (i.e., no active strategies for thromboprophylaxis in place). Blinding was not used.A total of 2,611 patients (1,154 in the intervention and 1,457 in the control group) were eligible and included in the analysis. This multicomponent intervention did not lead to a significant difference in appropriate VTE prophylaxis rates between intervention and control hospitals (appropriate management rate odds ratio = 0.80; 95% confidence interval: 0.50, 1.28; p = 0.36; intra-class correlation coefficient: 0.022), and thus was not considered feasible. Major barriers to effective knowledge translation were poor attendance by clinical staff at education and feedback sessions, difficulty locating preprinted orders, and lack of involvement by clinical and administrative leaders. We identified several factors that may increase uptake of a VTE prophylaxis strategy, including local champions, support from clinical and administrative leaders, mandatory use, and a simple, clinically relevant risk assessment tool.Hospitals allocated to our multicomponent intervention did not have a higher rate of medical inpatients appropriately managed for thromboprophylaxis than did hospitals that were not allocated to this strategy.The Stroke Practice Improvement Network: a quasiexperimental trial of a multifaceted intervention to improve quality.The aim of this project was to determine whether a tailored multifaceted intervention aimed at site-specific barriers is more effective than audit feedback alone for improving adherence to inhospital stroke performance measures (PMs): door to needle time of less than 1 hour for tissue plasminogen activator, dysphagia screening, deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis, and warfarin treatment for atrial fibrillation.Hospitals were paired on baseline adherence to dysphagia screening and quality improvement infrastructure and randomized to receive audit feedback alone (n=7) versus audit feedback plus site-specific interventions (n=6). Data were collected on all admitted patients with stroke seen in the neurology department before and after a 6-month implementation period. The primary end point was the difference in postintervention adherence rates for each PM, except tissue plasminogen activator because of low sample size.Data were collected on 2071 preintervention patients and 1240 postintervention patients. Targeted site-specific interventions, such as standing orders and standardized dysphagia screens, were imperfectly implemented during the 6-month intervention period. For atrial fibrillation, the intervention group had an 11% higher postintervention adherence rate beyond that of the control group (98% v 87%, P < .005). No other statistically significant changes in PM adherence were observed.Implementation of site-specific interventions for quality improvement of specific measures in stroke was difficult to achieve in a 6-month time frame and led to improved adherence for only one of 3 PMs. Studies with a longer intervention period and more sites are required to determine whether tailored interventions can enhance stroke improvement.Preventing DVT and PE in hospitalized patients: improving a successful electronic alert.At Brigham and Women's Hospital (BWH) in Boston, MA, we recently concluded a four year randomized, controlled study of the effect of electronic alerts on physician behavior in the prevention of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) or pulmonary embolism (PE). We found that the use of an electronic alert reduced the risk of DVT or PE at 90 days by 41%. Upon review of the instances where the recommended prophylaxis was not accepted, we designed enhancements to the alert.Physician alerts to prevent symptomatic venous thromboembolism in hospitalized patients.Venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis remains underused among hospitalized patients. We designed and carried out a large, multicenter, randomized controlled trial to test the hypothesis that an alert from a hospital staff member to the attending physician will reduce the rate of symptomatic VTE among high-risk patients not receiving prophylaxis.We enrolled patients using a validated point score system to detect hospitalized patients at high risk for symptomatic VTE who were not receiving prophylaxis. We randomized 2493 patients (82% on Medical Services) from 25 study sites to the intervention group (n=1238), in which the responsible physician was alerted by another hospital staff member, or the control group (n=1255), in which no alert was issued. The primary end point was symptomatic, objectively confirmed VTE within 90 days. Patients whose physicians were alerted were more than twice as likely to receive VTE prophylaxis as control subjects (46.0% versus 20.6%; P<0.0001). The symptomatic VTE rate was lower in the intervention group (2.7% versus 3.4%; hazard ratio, 0.79; 95% CI, 0.50 to 1.25), but the difference did not achieve statistical significance. The rate of major bleeding at 30 days in the alert group was similar to that in the control group (2.1% versus 2.3%; P=0.68).A strategy of direct notification of the physician by a staff member increases prophylaxis use and leads to a reduction in the rate of symptomatic VTE in hospitalized patients. However, VTE prophylaxis continues to be underused even after physician notification, especially among Medical Service patients.Effect of a Quality Improvement Intervention With Daily Round Checklists, Goal Setting, and Clinician Prompting on Mortality of Critically Ill Patients: A Randomized Clinical Trial.The effectiveness of checklists, daily goal assessments, and clinician prompts as quality improvement interventions in intensive care units (ICUs) is uncertain.To determine whether a multifaceted quality improvement intervention reduces the mortality of critically ill adults.This study had 2 phases. Phase 1 was an observational study to assess baseline data on work climate, care processes, and clinical outcomes, conducted between August 2013 and March 2014 in 118 Brazilian ICUs. Phase 2 was a cluster randomized trial conducted between April and November 2014 with the same ICUs. The first 60 admissions of longer than 48 hours per ICU were enrolled in each phase.Intensive care units were randomized to a quality improvement intervention, including a daily checklist and goal setting during multidisciplinary rounds with follow-up clinician prompting for 11 care processes, or to routine care.In-hospital mortality truncated at 60 days (primary outcome) was analyzed using a random-effects logistic regression model, adjusted for patients' severity and the ICU's baseline standardized mortality ratio. Exploratory secondary outcomes included adherence to care processes, safety climate, and clinical events.A total of 6877 patients (mean age, 59.7 years; 3218 [46.8%] women) were enrolled in the baseline (observational) phase and 6761 (mean age, 59.6 years; 3098 [45.8%] women) in the randomized phase, with 3327 patients enrolled in ICUs (n = 59) assigned to the intervention group and 3434 patients in ICUs (n = 59) assigned to routine care. There was no significant difference in in-hospital mortality between the intervention group and the usual care group, with 1096 deaths (32.9%) and 1196 deaths (34.8%), respectively (odds ratio, 1.02; 95% CI, 0.82-1.26; P = .88). Among 20 prespecified secondary outcomes not adjusted for multiple comparisons, 6 were significantly improved in the intervention group (use of low tidal volumes, avoidance of heavy sedation, use of central venous catheters, use of urinary catheters, perception of team work, and perception of patient safety climate), whereas there were no significant differences between the intervention group and the control group for 14 outcomes (ICU mortality, central line-associated bloodstream infection, ventilator-associated pneumonia, urinary tract infection, mean ventilator-free days, mean ICU length of stay, mean hospital length of stay, bed elevation to ≥30°, venous thromboembolism prophylaxis, diet administration, job satisfaction, stress reduction, perception of management, and perception of working conditions).Among critically ill patients treated in ICUs in Brazil, implementation of a multifaceted quality improvement intervention with daily checklists, goal setting, and clinician prompting did not reduce in-hospital mortality.clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01785966.The effects of an informational video on patient knowledge, satisfaction and compliance with venous thromboembolism prophylaxis: a pilot study.Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is the leading cause of preventable death in hospitalized patients. Educational videos have been effectively used to increase patient satisfaction and knowledge. This study examined possible benefits of an educational video about VTE.Medical patients receiving VTE prophylaxis were screened within 48 h of admission. Upon enrollment, patients were randomly assigned to either watch a 5 min educational video on VTE or not, in addition to standard VTE education. Within 24-48 h after randomization, all patients completed a survey assessing VTE prophylaxis knowledge and satisfaction.Patients who watched the video averaged 83% correct responses to knowledge-based questions (regarding VTE risk, symptoms, and preventative measures) versus an average score of 62% for patients in the no video group (p<0.001). Patients who watched the video were more satisfied with their VTE education (4.8 vs. 3.4 out of 5, p<0.001).This educational video effectively provided baseline information to patients about VTE and improved patient satisfaction.A VTE educational video can be an effective tool for improving patient knowledge of the condition.Effectiveness of written guidelines on the appropriateness of thromboprophylaxis prescriptions for medical patients: a prospective randomized study.To assess the effectiveness of providing doctors with written thromboprophylaxis prescription aids based on current recommendations.A prospective trial of specific anticoagulant prescription forms: a 1-day survey before and after the intervention in each centre.30 Internal Medicine departments of Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris.All inpatients were included, except those who were either admitted or discharged on the day of the survey, and those receiving curative anticoagulant treatment.The study included three parts: (i) a 1-day baseline survey; (ii) over the following 3-month period, departments were randomized into two groups: all practitioners in wards allocated to the intervention group were required to systematically use specific anticoagulant prescription forms, whilst doctors in the control group continued prescribing according to their usual practices and (iii) a 1-day postintervention survey.The proportion of prescriptions in accordance with the recommendations.1,469 patients were included. The intervention produced a significant reduction in the frequency of over-prescriptions, from 25% to 14% of the patients who did not meet the guideline criteria (adjusted OR: 0.3; 95% CI: 0.1-0.8). Using specific forms did not improve under-prescription of anticoagulants. A little over 60% of the patients who met guideline criteria for thromboprophylaxis were prescribed anticoagulants in both intervention and control wards, either at baseline or after intervention.Multitargeted interventions using a variety of means and strategies should still be considered to improve prescriptions that may have a significant impact on health expenses and, most importantly, on patients outcomes.Randomized trial of physician alerts for thromboprophylaxis after discharge.Many hospitalized Medical Service patients are at risk for venous thromboembolism in the months after discharge. We conducted a multicenter randomized controlled trial to test whether a hospital staff member's thromboprophylaxis alert to an Attending Physician before discharge will increase the rate of extended out-of-hospital prophylaxis and, in turn, reduce the incidence of symptomatic venous thromboembolism at 90 days.From April 2009 to January 2010, we enrolled hospitalized Medical Service patients using the point score system developed by Kucher et al to identify those at high risk for venous thromboembolism who were not ordered to receive thromboprophylaxis after discharge. There were 2513 eligible patients from 18 study sites randomized by computer in a 1:1 ratio to the alert group or the control group.Patients in the alert group were more than twice as likely to receive thromboprophylaxis at discharge as controls (22.0% vs 9.7%, P <.0001). Based on an intention-to-treat analysis, symptomatic venous thromboembolism at 90 days (99.9% follow-up) occurred in 4.5% of patients in the alert group, compared with 4.0% of controls (hazard ratio 1.12; 95% confidence interval, 0.74-1.69). The rate of major bleeding at 30 days in the alert group was similar to that of the control group (1.2% vs 1.2%, hazard ratio 0.94; 95% confidence interval, 0.44-2.01).Alerting providers to extend thromboprophylaxis after hospital discharge in Medical Service patients increased the rate of prophylaxis but did not decrease the rate of symptomatic venous thromboembolism.Adequacy of venous thromboprophylaxis in acutely ill medical patients (IMPART): multisite comparison of different clinical decision support systems.The adequacy of thromboprophylaxis prescriptions in acutely ill hospitalized medical patients needs improvement.To prospectively assess the efficacy of thromboprophylaxis adequacy of various clinical decision support systems (CDSS) with the aim of increasing the use of explicit criteria for thromboprophylaxis prescription in nine Swiss medical services.We randomly assigned medical services to a pocket digital assistant program (PDA), pocket cards (PC) and no CDSS (controls). In centers using an electronic chart, an e-alert system (eAlerts) was developed. After 4 months, we compared post-CDSS with baseline thromboprophylaxis adequacy for the various CDSS and control groups.Overall, 1085 patients were included (395 controls, 196 PC, 168 PDA, 326 eAlerts), 651 pre- and 434 post-CDSS implementation: 472 (43.5%) presented a risk of VTE justifying thromboprophylaxis (31.8% pre, 61.1% post) and 556 (51.2%) received thromboprophylaxis (54.2% pre, 46.8% post). The overall adequacy (% patients with adequate prescription) of pre- and post-CDSS implementation was 56.2 and 50.7 for controls (P = 0.29), 67.3 and 45.3 for PC (P = 0.002), 66.0 and 64.9 for PDA (P = 0.99), 50.5 and 56.2 for eAlerts (P = 0.37), respectively, eAlerts limited overprescription (56% pre, 31% post, P = 0.01).While pocket cards and handhelds did not improve thromboprophylaxis adequacy, eAlerts had a modest effect, particularly on the reduction of overprescription. This effect only partially contributes to the improvement of patient safety and more work is needed towards institution-tailored tools.A prospective, controlled trial of a pharmacy-driven alert system to increase thromboprophylaxis rates in medical inpatients.Although venous thromboembolism is an important cause of morbidity and mortality within the hospital, a significant proportion of at-risk inpatients do not receive measures known to reduce the risk of deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. The objective of the present study was to determine whether a pharmacy-driven alert system would, compared to usual care, be associated with a higher rate of adequate venous thromboembolism prevention measures among at-risk inpatients on a general internal medicine service. The study was a prospective, controlled trial set at a university-based teaching hospital. The participants were adults who were admitted (Monday through Friday) to the general internal medicine inpatient service from 19 June to 21 September 2006. Their treatment included a pharmacist assessment of venous thromboembolism risk and a pharmacist-driven alert to the treating physician. The Proportion of at-risk patients receiving adequate thromboprophylaxis within 36 h of admission was recorded. Overall, 140 patients were at sufficient risk for venous thromboembolism to be included. In the usual care group, prophylactic measures were ordered for 49 (61%) of the 80 patients at moderate to high risk. In the pharmacist-alert group, 44 (73%) of the 60 moderate to high venous thromboembolism-risk patients received adequate thromboprophylaxis (P = 0.15). Although we did not observe a statistically significant difference between the groups, our results are consistent with previous reports suggesting that alert systems can increase the proportion of hospitalized patients who receive adequate measures to prevent venous thromboembolism.Electronic alerts to prevent venous thromboembolism among hospitalized patients.Prophylaxis against deep-vein thrombosis in hospitalized patients remains underused. We hypothesized that the use of a computer-alert program to encourage prophylaxis might reduce the frequency of deep-vein thrombosis among high-risk hospitalized patients.We developed a computer program linked to the patient database to identify consecutive hospitalized patients at risk for deep-vein thrombosis in the absence of prophylaxis. The program used medical-record numbers to randomly assign 1255 eligible patients to an intervention group, in which the responsible physician was alerted to a patient's risk of deep-vein thrombosis, and 1251 patients to a control group, in which no alert was issued. The physician was required to acknowledge the alert and could then withhold or order prophylaxis, including graduated compression stockings, pneumatic compression boots, unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparin, or warfarin. The primary end point was clinically diagnosed, objectively confirmed deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism at 90 days.More patients in the intervention group than in the control group received mechanical prophylaxis (10.0 percent vs. 1.5 percent, P<0.001) or pharmacologic prophylaxis (23.6 percent vs. 13.0 percent, P<0.001). The primary end point occurred in 61 patients (4.9 percent) in the intervention group, as compared with 103 (8.2 percent) in the control group; the Kaplan-Meier estimates of the likelihood of freedom from deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism at 90 days were 94.1 percent (95 percent confidence interval, 92.5 to 95.4 percent) and 90.6 percent (95 percent confidence interval, 88.7 to 92.2 percent), respectively (P<0.001). The computer alert reduced the risk of deep-vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism at 90 days by 41 percent (hazard ratio, 0.59; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.43 to 0.81; P=0.001).The institution of a computer-alert program increased physicians' use of prophylaxis and markedly reduced the rates of deep-vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism among hospitalized patients at risk.