Efficacy and safety of vi-tetanus toxoid conjugated typhoid vaccine (PedaTyph™) in Indian children: School based cluster randomized study.Vi polysaccharide typhoid vaccines cannot be used in children <2 years owing to poor immunogenic and T cell independent properties. Conjugate vaccine prepared by binding Vi to tetanus toxoids (Vi-TT) induces protective levels even in children <2 years. We evaluated efficacy and safety following vaccination with a Vi-TT vaccine in children 6 months to 12 years of age. Overall, 1765 subjects were recruited from two registered municipal urban slums of southern Kolkata. Most of the children of the slum dwellers attended the schools in the locality which was selected with permission from the school authority. Schools were randomly divided into vaccinated (Test group) and unvaccinated group (Control group). Children and their siblings of test group received 2-doses of PedaTyph™ vaccine at 6 weeks interval. Control group received vaccines as per national guidelines. Adverse events (AEs) were examined after 30 minutes, 1 month and clinical events were observed till 12 months post-vaccination. Incidence of culture positive typhoid fever in the control group was 1.27% vis-a-vis none in vaccine group during 12 months. In subgroup evaluated for immunogenicity, an antibody titer value of 1.8 EU/ml (95% CI: 1.5 EU/ml, 2.2 EU/ml), 32 EU/ml (95% CI: 27.0 EU/ml, 39.0 EU/ml) and 14 EU/ml (95% CI: 12.0 EU/ml, 17.0 EU/ml) at baseline, 6 weeks and 12 months, respectively was observed. Sero-conversion among the sub-group was 100% after 6 weeks of post-vaccination and 83% after 12 months considering 4-fold rise from baseline. The efficacy of vaccine was 100 % (95% CI: 97.6%, 100%) in the first year of follow-up with minimal AEs post vaccination. Vi conjugate typhoid vaccine conferred 100% protection against typhoid fever in 1765 children 6 months to 12 years of age with high immunogenicity in a subgroup from the vaccine arm.Controlled field trials and laboratory studies on the effectiveness of typhoid vaccines in Poland, 1961-64.In recent years studies of the effectiveness of different typhoid vaccines have been sponsored by the World Health Organization in British Guiana, the USSR, and Yugoslavia. A similarly sponsored study has been made in Poland under the auspices of the Polish Typhoid Committee. In the controlled field trial four types of vaccine were used: (1) bacterial acetone-killed and -dried (vaccines K and P), (2) bacterial formol-killed phenol-preserved (vaccine N), (3) Westphal's endotoxin adsorbed on aluminium hydroxide (vaccine S), and (4) Grasset's vaccine (autolysate of typhoid bacilli adsorbed on aluminium hydroxide; vaccine T). The control vaccine was tetanus toxoid (vaccine O). Laboratory tests were also carried out.In children aged 5-14 years who received two inoculations, vaccine N was the most effective, followed by K; vaccine T was distinctly less effective. In people aged 15-60 years the small number of typhoid cases made evaluation difficult; however, vaccines N and P inoculated once afforded protection, whereas vaccine S imparted none.FURTHER STUDIES ARE DESIRABLE ON THE LABORATORY TESTING OF TYPHOID VACCINES: at present the H and O agglutination tests with sera of immunized rabbits, combined with an active mouse-protection test, can be recommended, provided that a standard typhoid vaccine is used for comparison.Protective activity of Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine against typhoid fever.The protective efficacy against typhoid fever of a single intramuscular injection of 25 micrograms of the Vi capsular polysaccharide (CPS) was assessed in a randomised double-blind controlled trial. Vaccination of 11,384 children was followed by 21 months' surveillance. 47 blood-culture-proven cases of typhoid occurred in children who received meningococcal A + C CPS vaccine and 19 cases in those vaccinated with Vi CPS. Protective efficacy was 60% calculated from the day of vaccination and 64% from 6 weeks after vaccination. Surveillance also included 11,691 unvaccinated children; 173 cases occurred in this group. Protective efficacy in relation to the unvaccinated group was 77.4% and 81.0% after 21 months, calculated immediately and 6 weeks after vaccination, respectively. Vaccination was associated with minimum local side-effects, and an increase in anti-Vi antibodies occurred, as measured by radioimmunoassay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Antibody levels remained significantly raised at 6 and 12 months post vaccination. Vi CPS is thus a safe and effective means of typhoid vaccination.Persistence of antibodies to the Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine in South African school children ten years after immunization.Between 10 and 11 years after children were vaccinated with Vi capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella typhi or meningococcal A + C control vaccine in a double blind randomized trial, we traced 83 subjects, aged 16-20 years. A blood sample was taken for determination of Vi antibody titres in both groups by radioimmunoassay. TO and TH titres were also done to assess if the participants had had recent exposure to typhoid fever. Fifty-eight percent of subjects in both groups had protective levels of Vi antibody against Salmonella typhi (a titre greater than 1 microgram ml-1). There was no significant difference in the levels of Vi antibodies in the cases versus the controls (p = 0.5). Two of the children who had received meningococcal A + C vaccine had recently had typhoid fever. Our data show that adolescents in typhoid endemic areas have high levels of Vi antibodies regardless of previous vaccination status, suggesting that Vi antibodies are acquired in adolescence by a large percentage of the population in this area. Moreover, Vi vaccination has led to ongoing antibody production in greater than 50% of Vi vaccinated children in an endemic area for a period of 10 years. Ongoing antigenic exposure may have contributed to these antibody levels.Impact of Vi vaccination on spatial patterns of typhoid fever in the slums of Kolkata, India.A mass typhoid Vi vaccination campaign was carried out among approximately 60,000 slum residents of Kolkata, India. This study evaluated the impact of the campaign on spatial patterns of typhoid fever. Eighty contiguous residential groups of households in the study area were randomized to receive either a single dose of the Vi polysaccharide vaccine or a single dose of the inactivated hepatitis A vaccine as the control agent. Persons aged two years and older were eligible to receive the vaccine. Vaccine protection against typhoid fever was monitored for two years after vaccination at both outpatient and inpatient facilities serving the study population. Geographic analytic and mapping tools were used in the analysis. Spatial randomness of the disease was observed during the pre-vaccination period, which turned into a significant pattern after vaccination. The high-risk areas for typhoid were observed in the area dominated by the control clusters, and the low-risk areas were in the area dominated by the Vi clusters. Furthermore, the control clusters surrounded by the Vi clusters were low risk for typhoid fever. The results demonstrated the ability of mass vaccination to change the spatial patterns of disease through the creation of spatial barriers to transmission of the disease. Understanding and mapping the disease risk could be useful for designing a community-based vaccination strategy to control disease.Prevention of typhoid fever in Nepal with the Vi capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella typhi. A preliminary report.We conducted a pilot study followed by a large clinical trial in Nepal of the use of the capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella typhi (Vi) as a vaccine to prevent typhoid fever. In the pilot study, involving 274 Nepalese, there were no significant side effects of the Vi vaccine; about 75 percent responded with a rise in serum antibodies of fourfold or more. In the clinical trial, residents of five villages were given intramuscular injections of either Vi or, as a control, pneumococcus vaccine dispensed in coded, randomly arranged, single-dose syringes. There were 6907 participants, of whom 6438 were members of the target population (5 to 44 years of age); each was visited every two days. Those with temperatures of 37.8 degrees C or higher for three consecutive days were examined and asked to give blood for culture. Typhoid was diagnosed as either blood culture-positive or clinically suspected on the basis of bradycardia, splenomegaly, and fever, with a negative blood culture. Seventeen months after vaccination, the codes were broken for the 71 patients meeting the criteria for either culture-positive or clinically suspected typhoid. The attack rate of typhoid was 16.2 per 1000 among the controls and 4.1 per 1000 among those immunized with Vi (P less than 0.00001). The efficacy of Vi was 72 percent in the culture-positive cases, 80 percent in the clinically suspected cases, and 75 percent in the two groups combined. These data provide evidence that Vi antibodies confer protection against typhoid. Surveillance continues to determine the duration of Vi-induced immunity.Immunogenicity of Salmonella typhi Ty21a vaccine for young children.An attenuated Salmonella typhi Ty21a vaccine was administered to 18 infants and toddlers (less than or equal to 24 months old) to determine its safety and immunogenicity. The vaccination (10(9) CFU per dose, three doses) was well tolerated. However, after the vaccination there was no evidence of a humoral or cellular immune response to S. typhi. The vaccine used was known to be immunogenic for older children and adults. The results support the view that the immunogenicity of Ty21a is age dependent.Large-scale field trial of Ty21a live oral typhoid vaccine in enteric-coated capsule formulation.Three doses, given within one week, of Ty21a attenuated Salmonella typhi oral vaccine in an enteric-coated formulation provided 67% efficacy for at least 3 years in a randomised, placebo-controlled field trial involving 109,000 schoolchildren in Santiago, Chile. Increasing the interval between doses to twenty-one days did not enhance protection. Significantly less protection followed administration of vaccine in gelatin capsules with sodium bicarbonate. Ty21a provides the same level of protection as the heat/phenol-inactivated whole cell parenteral vaccine but differs in not causing adverse reactions. Ty21a may now be regarded as a practical public health tool.Comparison of the safety and immunogenicity of delta aroC delta aroD and delta cya delta crp Salmonella typhi strains in adult volunteers.Three attenuated Salmonella typhi strains have been constructed by introducing deletions in aroC and aroD or deletions in cya and crp into one of two wild-type parent strains, Ty2 or ISP1820. These mutant strains were designated CVD 906 (ISP1820 delta aroC delta aroD), CVD 908 (Ty2 delta aroC delta aroD), and chi 3927 (Ty2 delta cya delta crp). Two studies were conducted with 36 healthy adult inpatient volunteers to determine in a double-blind fashion the safety and immunogenicity of approximately 5 x 10(4) and 5 x 10(5) CFU of each of these three vaccine candidates given as a single dose. No statistically significant difference in the incidence of reactions among vaccinees was observed. Fever (oral temperature greater than or equal to 38.2 degrees C) occurred in 2 of 12 volunteers who received CVD 906, in 0 of 12 who received CVD 908, and in 1 of 12 who received chi 3927. Vaccine bacteremia without symptoms occurred in 1 of 12 vaccinees who received CVD 906, in 0 of 12 who received CVD 908, and in 2 of 12 who received chi 3927. Overall, 19 (53%) of 36 vaccinees developed immunoglobulin G antibody to S. typhi lipopolysaccharide after vaccination, with no statistically significant differences in the rate of seroconversion among volunteers in the three groups. We conclude that defined mutations in the aromatic biosynthetic pathway and in the cyclic AMP global regulatory system attenuate S. typhi. Mutant strains CVD 906, CVD 908, and chi 3927 are highly (and approximately equally) immunogenic but possibly differ in their propensity to induce fever. Further studies are needed to document the apparent relative safety of CVD 908 as a typhoid vaccine and as a vaccine carrier of foreign antigens.Comparative tolerability and immunogenicity of Typherix or Typhim Vi in healthy adults: 0, 12-month and 0, 24-month administration.This study was carried out to compare the immunogenicity and tolerability of Typherix, a recently developed typhoid Vi polysaccharide vaccine, with Typhim Vi, the first available Vi polysaccharide vaccine, in healthy adults. Three different production lots of Typherix were also compared.All subjects were randomised to receive an initial dose of Typhim Vi, or one of three production lots of Typherix, and subsequently randomised to receive a second dose of vaccine at 12 or 24 months. Adverse events were recorded by patients for 6 days after vaccination. Anti-Vi antibodies were measured in serum on days 0, 7, 14 and 28, at months 6, 12 and 24, and 1 month after the second dose (month 13 or 25).A total of 400 healthy subjects aged between 18 and 50 years received the first dose of vaccine. Significantly fewer patients in the three Typherix groups than in the Typhim Vi group reported adverse events (17 to 21% vs 44%, respectively). Seropositivity rates were 95.7 to 97.9% among subjects in the three Typherix groups at day 14, and 96.8% in the Typhim Vi group (no significant between-group differences). The only significant difference between the vaccines in seropositivity was observed at day 7 (71.8% for Typherix vs 86.4% for Typhim Vi). Of subjects receiving the second dose of Typherix at 12 and 24 months, 77% and 61% were seropositive before revaccination, compared with 69% and 46% for Typhim Vi (no significant difference). There were no significant differences in seropositivity or adverse events between the two vaccines after administration of the second dose (12 or 24 months).The initial dose of Typherix was associated with fewer adverse events than Typhim Vi. On the basis of serum Vi titres, the two vaccines demonstrated equivalent immunogenicity, with 0, 12-month and 0, 24-month administration. There were no differences between the three different production lots of Typherix.Phase 2 clinical trial of attenuated Salmonella enterica serovar typhi oral live vector vaccine CVD 908-htrA in U.S. volunteers.Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strain CVD 908-htrA is a live attenuated strain which may be useful as an improved oral typhoid vaccine and as a vector for cloned genes of other pathogens. We conducted a phase 2 trial in which 80 healthy adults received one of two dosage levels of CVD 908-htrA in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study. There were no differences in the rates of side effects among volunteers who received high-dose vaccine (4.5 x 10(8) CFU), lower-dose vaccine (5 x 10(7) CFU), or placebo in the 21 days after vaccination, although recipients of high-dose vaccine (8%) had more frequent diarrhea than placebo recipients (0%) in the first 7 days. Seventy-seven percent and 46% of recipients of high- and lower-dose vaccines, respectively, briefly excreted vaccine organisms in their stools. All blood cultures were negative. Antibody-secreting cells producing antilipopolysaccharide (LPS) immunoglobulin A (IgA) were detected in 100 and 92% of recipients of high- and lower-dose vaccines, respectively. Almost half the volunteers developed serum anti-LPS IgG. Lymphocyte proliferation and gamma interferon production against serovar Typhi antigens occurred in a significant proportion of vaccinees. This phase 2 study supports the further development of CVD 908-htrA as a single-dose vaccine against typhoid fever and as a possible live vector for oral delivery of other vaccine antigens.Comparative efficacy of two, three, or four doses of TY21a live oral typhoid vaccine in enteric-coated capsules: a field trial in an endemic area.Ability of SPI2 mutant of S. typhi to effectively induce antibody responses to the mucosal antigen enterotoxigenic E. coli heat labile toxin B subunit after oral delivery to humans.We have evaluated an oral vaccine based on an Salmonella enteric serovar typhi (S. typhi) Ty2 derivative TSB7 harboring deletion mutations in ssaV (SPI-2) and aroC together with a chromosomally integrated copy of eltB encoding the B subunit of enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli heat labile toxin (LT-B) in volunteers. Two oral doses of 10(8) or 10(9)CFU were administered to two groups of volunteers and both doses were well tolerated, with no vaccinemia, and only transient stool shedding. Immune responses to LT-B and S. typhi lipopolysaccharide were demonstrated in 67 and 97% of subjects, respectively, without evidence of anti-carrier immunity preventing boosting of LT-B responses in many cases. Further development of this salmonella-based (spi-VEC) system for oral delivery of heterologous antigens appears warranted.Immune responses to Vi capsular polysaccharide typhoid vaccine in children 2 to 16 years old in Karachi, Pakistan, and Kolkata, India.The geometric mean concentration (GMC) and the proportion maintaining a protective level (150 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) units [ELU]/ml) 2 years following a single dose of 25 μg of injectable Vi capsular polysaccharide typhoid vaccine was measured against that of the control hepatitis A vaccine in children 2 to 16 years old in cluster randomized trials in Karachi and Kolkata. The GMC for the Vi group (1,428 ELU/ml) was statistically significantly different from the GMC of the control hepatitis A vaccine group (86 ELU/ml) after 6 weeks. A total of 117 children (95.1%) in the Vi group and 9 (7.5%) in the hepatitis A group showed a 4-fold rise in Vi IgG antibody concentrations at 6 weeks (P < 0.01). Protective antibody levels remained significantly different between the two groups at 2 years (38% in the Vi vaccine groups and 6% in the hepatitis A group [P < 0.01]). A very small proportion of younger children (2 to 5 years old) maintained protective Vi IgG antibody levels at 2 years, a result that was not statistically significantly different compared to that for the hepatitis A group (38.1% versus 10.5%). The GMCs of the Vi IgG antibody after 2 years were 133 ELU/ml for children 2 to <5 years old and 349 ELU/ml for children 5 to 16 years old. In conclusion, Vi capsular polysaccharide typhoid vaccine is immunogenic in children in settings of South Asia where typhoid is highly endemic. The antibody levels in children who received this vaccine remained higher than those in children who received the control vaccine but were significantly reduced at 2 years of follow-up.phoP/phoQ-deleted Salmonella typhi (Ty800) is a safe and immunogenic single-dose typhoid fever vaccine in volunteers.The phoP/phoQ virulence regulatory genes of Salmonella typhi Ty2 were deleted, and the resultant strain (Ty800) was tested as a live attenuated typhoid fever vaccine in human volunteers. Groups of 2 or 3 subjects received single oral doses of 10(7), 10(8), 10(9), or 10(10) cfu. Two volunteers who received the largest dose had self-limited side effects; no bacteremias were detected. Ten of 11 subjects had evidence of intestinal immune responses to the vaccine as measured by increases in S. typhi lipopolysaccharide-specific IgA-secreting cells in peripheral blood samples. Humoral immune responses were measured and compared with those of control vaccinees who received 4 oral doses of S. typhi Ty21a. In the most sensitive assays, 9 of 11 volunteers and 5 of 8 Ty21a control vaccinees had evidence of IgG directed against S. typhi antigens. Ty800 is safe, and single oral doses are highly immunogenic in humans.Controlled field trial on the effectiveness of one and two doses of acetone-inactivated and dried typhoid vaccine.A controlled field trial was carried out with acetone-dried vaccine on about 35 000 people on the Tongan islands of tongatapu and 'Eua where typhoid fever is endemic. Volunteers were distributed at random into 3 groups, 1 of which received 1 dose of typhoid vaccine and a second 2 doses; the third, a control group, received tetanus toxoid. The population was vaccinated in 1966 and was studied until the end of 1973. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the vaccine was based on cases of typhoid fever that were confirmed by positive blood cultures. Morbidity rates in the 3 groups indicated that the acetone-dried vaccine used was effective and that a single dose of vaccine gave reasonable protection for a short period, but that 2 doses gave greater and longer protection. The results of this trial are compared with those of earlier field and laboratory studies.A controlled field trial of the effectiveness of phenol and alcohol typhoid vaccines: Final report.In order to determine the effectiveness of anti-typhoid vaccines in man a controlled field trial, the first of its kind, was organized in 1954-60 in the town and district of Osijek, Yugoslavia. Heat-killed, phenol-preserved and alcohol-killed, alcohol-preserved anti-typhoid monovaccines were used, with phenolized dysentery vaccine as a control. Some 36000 volunteers were allocated at random into three comparable groups: a phenol-vaccine group, an alcohol-vaccine group and a control group. Immunization consisted of a primary course of two injections. A reinforcing dose was given a year later. The effectiveness of the vaccines was measured by comparing specific morbidity in the three groups, and for greater accuracy only bacteriologically proved typhoid cases were taken into consideration in the statistical analysis. In addition, some 11 000 persons were vaccinated in 1955; these were divided at random into two groups, which received phenolized and alcoholized vaccine respectively; there was no control group. It was found that phenolized vaccine gave relatively high protection while alcoholized vaccine was of little, if any, efficacy. The efficacy of phenolized vaccine was of rather long duration. These field results obtained on man are not in agreement with the results of laboratory tests known at present. Neither laboratory assays on mice nor serological tests on man could be correlated with the results of the field trial. For this reason further studies are necessary in order to determine the value of various other types of anti-typhoid vaccines and to develop reliable laboratory tests for the measurement of the potency of anti-typhoid vaccines.Controlled field trials of killed oral typhoid and paratyphoid B vaccines and cell-free, chemical aerosol typhoid vaccine.Three controlled field trials were carried out. One of them (1963) showed that an aerosol with cell-free, chemical typhoid vaccine did not protect vaccinees from the disease. The other trials (1964 and 1965) assessing the efficacy of killed oral typhoid vaccine revealed a short term (up to 3 months) protective effect. In the trial of oral paratyphoid B vaccine no statistically significant difference in morbidity in the test and control groups was observed due to the small number of cases.The Vi conjugate typhoid vaccine is safe, elicits protective levels of IgG anti-Vi, and is compatible with routine infant vaccines.Typhoid fever remains a serious problem in developing countries. Current vaccines are licensed for individuals who are 5 years old or older. A conjugate of the capsular polysaccharide (CP) of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (Vi) bound to recombinant exoprotein A of Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Vi-rEPA) enhanced Vi immunogenicity and protected 2- to 5-year-olds in Vietnam. In this study, Vi-rEPA was evaluated for use in infants. A total of 301 full-term Vietnamese infants received Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) vaccines alone or with Vi-rEPA or Haemophilus influenzae type b-tetanus toxoid conjugate (Hib-TT) at 2, 4, and 6 months and Vi-rEPA or Hib-TT alone at 12 months. Infants were visited 6, 24, and 48 h after each injection to monitor adverse reactions. Maternal, cord, and infant sera were assayed for IgG anti-Vi and for IgG antibodies to Hib CP and the diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis toxins at 7, 12, and 13 months. No vaccine-related serious adverse reactions occurred. In the Vi-rEPA group, the IgG anti-Vi geometric mean (GM) increased from the cord level of 0.66 to 17.4 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay units (EU) at 7 months, declined to 4.76 EU at 12 months, and increased to 50.1 EU 1 month after the 4th dose (95% of infants had levels of ≥ 3.5 EU, the estimated protective level). Controls had no increase of the IgG anti-Vi GM. Infants with cord anti-Vi levels of <3.5 EU responded with significantly higher IgG anti-Vi levels than those with levels of ≥ 3.5 EU. Anti-diphtheria, -tetanus, and -pertussis toxin levels were similar in all groups. Vi-rEPA was safe, induced protective anti-Vi levels, and was compatible with EPI vaccines, and it can be used in infants. High cord IgG anti-Vi levels partially suppressed infant responses to Vi-rEPA.Safety and immunogenicity of Salmonella typhi Ty21a liquid formulation vaccine in 4- to 6-year-old Thai children.Head-to-head comparison of humoral immune responses to Vi capsular polysaccharide and Salmonella Typhi Ty21a typhoid vaccines--a randomized trial.The two typhoid vaccines, the parenteral Vi capsular polysaccharide and the oral live whole-cell Salmonella Typhi Ty21a vaccine, provide similar levels of protection in field trials. Sharing no antigens, they are thought to confer protection by different mechanisms. This is the first head-to-head study to compare the humoral immune responses to these two vaccines.50 age- and gender-matched volunteers were immunized, 25 with the Vi and 25 with the Ty21a vaccine. Circulating plasmablasts reactive with whole-cell Salmonella Typhi or one of the typhoidal antigenic structures, Vi, O-9,12, and H-d antigens, were identified as antibody-secreting cells (ASC) with ELISPOT. Homing receptor (HR) expressions were determined. These results were compared with ASC in four patients with typhoid fever. Antibodies to S. Typhi lipopolysaccharides were assessed in cultures of ALS (antibodies in lymphocyte supernatants) and in serum with ELISA.In 49 out of 50 vaccinees, no typhoid-specific plasmablasts were seen before vaccination. On day 7, response to Vi antigen was mounted in 24/25 volunteers in the Vi, and none in the Ty21a group; response to S. Typhi and O-9,12 was mounted in 49/50 vaccinees; and to H-d in 3/50. The numbers of typhoid-specific plasmablasts (total of ASC to Vi, O-9,12 and H-d antigens) proved equal in the vaccination groups. The HR expressions indicated a mainly systemic homing in the Vi and intestinal in the Ty21a group, the latter resembling that in natural infection. Plasmablasts proved more sensitive than serum and ALS in assessing the immune response.The typhoid-specific humoral responses to Vi and Ty21a vaccines are similar in magnitude, but differ in expected localization and antigen-specificity. The unforeseen O antigen-specific response in the Vi group is probably due to lipopolysaccharide contaminating the vaccine preparation. Only the response to Ty21a vaccine was found to imitate that in natural infection.Current Controlled Trials Ltd. c/o BioMed Central ISRCTN68125331.A mass vaccination campaign targeting adults and children to prevent typhoid fever in Hechi; expanding the use of Vi polysaccharide vaccine in southeast China: a cluster-randomized trial.One of the goals of this study was to learn the coverage, safety and logistics of a mass vaccination campaign against typhoid fever in children and adults using locally produced typhoid Vi polysaccharide (PS) and group A meningococcal PS vaccines in southern China.The vaccination campaign targeted 118,588 persons in Hechi, Guangxi Province, aged between 5 to 60 years, in 2003. The study area was divided into 107 geographic clusters, which were randomly allocated to receive one of the single-dose parenteral vaccines. All aspects regarding vaccination logistics, feasibility and safety were documented and systematically recorded. Results of the logistics, feasibility and safety are reported.The campaign lasted 5 weeks and the overall vaccination coverage was 78%. On average, the 30 vaccine teams gave immunizations on 23 days. Vaccine rates were higher in those aged < or = 15 years (90%) than in adolescents and young adults (70%). Planned mop-up activities increased the coverage by 17%. The overall vaccine wastage was 11%. The cold chain was maintained and documented. 66 individuals reported of adverse events out of all vaccinees, where fever (21%), malaise (19%) and local redness (19%) were the major symptoms; no life-threatening event occurred. Three needle-sharp events were reported.The mass immunization proved feasible and safe, and vaccine coverage was high. Emphasis should be placed on: injection safety measures, community involvement and incorporation of mop-up strategies into any vaccination campaign. School-based and all-age Vi mass immunizations programs are potentially important public health strategies for prevention of typhoid fever in high-risk populations in southern China.A controlled field trial of live Salmonella typhi strain Ty 21a oral vaccine against typhoid: three-year results.A controlled field trial of Salmonella typhi strain Ty 21a oral vaccine against typhoid was carried out in Alexandria, Egypt, from March 1978 to March 1981. A total of 32,388 children was included in the study. The children were divided in two comparable groups, one given three doses of vaccine and the other three doses of placebo. Each dose of vaccine contained 1-8 X 10(9) live Ty 21a bacteria. The population was monitored, and each suspected case of typhoid was investigated bacteriologically and serologically. The effectiveness of the vaccine was assessed by analyzing the number of confirmed cases of typhoid fever in the two groups. The incidence of typhoid fever was 4.9 cases per 10,000 children per year in the control group and 0.2 cases per 10,000 children per year in the vaccine group. The results indicate that, in the dose schedule used, the Ty 21a mutant strain, which is stable and safe, is protective for a period of at least three years.Safety and immunogenicity of live recombinant Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi Ty21a expressing urease A and B from Helicobacter pylori in human volunteers.Helicobacter pylori urease was expressed in the common live typhoid vaccine Ty21a yielding Ty21a(pDB1). Nine volunteers received Ty21a(pDB1) and three control volunteers received Ty21a. No serious adverse effects were observed in any of the volunteers. Ten out of 12 volunteers developed humoral immune responses to the Salmonella carrier as detected by antigen-specific antibody-secreting cells but only two volunteers seroconverted. A total of five volunteers showed responses in one or two out of three assays for cellular responses to the carrier (proliferation, IFN-gamma-secretion, IFN-gamma-ELISPOT). Three of the volunteers that had received Ty21a(pDB1) showed a weak but significant T-cell response to Helicobacter urease, while no volunteer had detectable humoral responses to urease. Ty21a(pDB1) is a suitable prototype to optimize Salmonella-based vaccination for efficient cellular responses that could mediate protective immunity against Helicobacter.Immunogenicity of Ty21a attenuated "Salmonella typhi" given with sodium bicarbonate or in enteric-coated capsules.Ty21a, a stable attenuated mutant of Salmonella typhi, is a safe, protective oral vaccine when 3 doses of 10(9) cells in saline are taken after neutralization of gastric acidity by 1 g NaHCO3. To identify a more convenient method to administer vaccine and to determine the feasibility of immunizing with a single dose, we studied the immune response of children and adults to different formulations of Ty21a with a newly developed, sensitive, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In this ELISA, a rise in S. typhi O antibody was defined as a change in net optical density of greater than or equal to 0.15 (more than 3 SD from the mean difference in optical density in a negative control population). Three hundred and thirty-five Chilean children were given 3 doses of 10(9) Ty21a in 150 ml of milk with 0.8 g NaHCO3 or in enteric-coated capsules. In each group, 5% seroconverted by Widal O but 41% by IgG ELISA O antibody titers; mean antibody levels by group were identical. Studies were also carried out in healthy college students in a non-endemic area (U.S.A.) who had no history of prior typhoid immunization. In total, 141 U.S. adults received vaccine formulated in either one of two ways: 1) in gelatin capsules administered with two additional gelatin capsules containing a total of 0.8 gm NaHCO3 or 2) in enteric-coated capsules. Thirty-six persons received one dose, 30 got two doses and 16 ingested three doses of enteric-coated vaccines, while 44 persons receiving one dose and 15 got two doses of vaccine in the gelatin capsule formulation. Rates of seroconversion of ELISA O antibody were similar in all the groups. Ty21a vaccine was not recovered from multiple stool, jejunal fluid or blood cultures of the U.S. vaccine recipients. Based on these observations a large-scale field trial of efficacy has been initiated in 90.000 schoolchildren 6-20 years of age in Santiago, Chile, of whom one-third received one dose of enteric-coated vaccine, one-third got two doses and the remainder received placebo.Clinical and immunological response to typhoid vaccination with parenteral or oral vaccines in two groups of 30 recruits.The clinical and immunological responses to typhoid vaccination with parenteral and oral vaccines in two groups of 30 adult male subjects were studied. Specific anti-Salmonella typhi cell-mediated immunity and total or specific anti-lipopolysaccharide faecal immunoglobulin (Ig) A titres in vaccinated subjects were monitored. Cellular antibacterial activity was significantly increased only in orally vaccinated subjects. Serum arming activity and inhibition experiments suggested an IgA-dependent cellular cytotoxicity in those orally vaccinated. In these subjects, a total and anti-lipopolysaccharide faecal IgA increase was observed lasting up to 8 months after completion of the vaccination schedule. In parenteral vaccinated subjects, an early onset transitory increase of IgM rheumatoid factor was observed. Oral vaccine was well tolerated and free of side effects, whereas 65% of parenterally vaccinated subjects reported side effects such as fever, headache, malaise and local tenderness in the injection site.A randomised trial evaluating the safety and immunogenicity of the novel single oral dose typhoid vaccine M01ZH09 in healthy Vietnamese children.The emergence of drug resistant typhoid fever is a major public health problem, especially in Asia. An oral single dose typhoid vaccine would have major advantages. M01ZH09 is a live oral single dose candidate typhoid vaccine containing Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (Ty2 aroC(-)ssaV(-)) ZH9 with two independently attenuating deletions. Studies in healthy adults demonstrated immunogenicity and an acceptable safety profile.We conducted a randomised placebo controlled, single-blind trial to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of M01ZH09 in healthy Vietnamese children aged 5 to 14 years.Subjects were randomly assigned to receive either a nominal dose of 5x10(9) CFU of M01ZH09 or placebo and were followed up for 28 days. The primary safety outcome was the proportion of subjects with any adverse event attributed to M01ZH09. The primary immunogenicity endpoint was the proportion of subjects who showed a positive immune response to M01ZH09 in the Salmonella Typhi lipopolysaccharide (LPS) specific serum IgA and IgG ELISA.One hundred and fifty-one children were enrolled, 101 subjects received M01ZH09 and 50 subjects received placebo. An intention to treat analysis was conducted. There were no serious adverse events and no bacteraemias. In the M01ZH09 group, 26 (26%; 95% CI, 18-5%) of 101 subjects experienced adverse events compared to 11 (22%; 95% CI, 12-36%) of 50 subjects in the placebo group (odds ratio (OR) [95%CI] = 1.23 [0.550-2.747]; p = 0.691). Faecal shedding of S. Typhi (Ty2 aroC(-)ssaV(-)) ZH9 was detected in 51 (51%; 95% CI, 41-61%) of 100 M01ZH09 subjects. No shedding was detected beyond day 3. A positive immune response, defined as 70% increase (1.7 fold change) in LPS specific serum IgG (day 14 or 28) and/or 50% increase (1.5 fold change) in LPS specific serum IgA (day 7 or 14) from baseline was detected in 98 (97%; 95% CI, 92-99%) of 101 M01ZH09 recipients and 8 (16%; 95% CI, 7-29%) of 50 placebo recipients. Twenty-eight (100%; 95% CI, 88-100%) of 28 vaccine recipients who were evaluated in the LPS specific IgA ELISPOT assay showed a positive response compared to none of the 14 placebo recipients tested.This was the first phase II trial of a novel oral candidate typhoid vaccine in children in an endemic country. M01ZH09 had an appropriate safety profile and was immunogenic in children.Controlled-trials.com ISRCTN91111837.FIELD and laboratory studies with typhoid vaccines: a preliminary report: Yugoslav Typhoid Commission.In 1953 the Yugoslav Typhoid Commission organized the first strictly controlled field trial of two types of anti-typhoid vaccine-alcoholized and phenolized-in an attempt to determine the relative and absolute effectiveness of each. They were tested against a phenolized control vaccine prepared from strains of Shigella flexneri, type II.This preliminary report gives the basic information on the conditions of the trial, in which 35 508 persons completed the course of two injections, and shows the results obtained.The phenolized vaccine proved the more effective of the two, giving protection in about 70% of the vaccinated, but the Commission points out that the results do not necessarily mean that the same degree of protection would be obtained with other batches of either vaccine. Laboratory work done with the field trial showed that the existing laboratory tests cannot at present be correlated with the protection afforded to man.Oral immunisation against typhoid fever in Indonesia with Ty21a vaccine.When tested under conditions of moderate transmission of typhoid fever, a liquid formulation of the oral typhoid fever vaccine Ty21a had a protective efficacy of 96% in Egypt, and an enteric coated capsule formulation had an efficacy of 67% in Chile. We compared the two formulations under conditions of intense transmission of typhoid fever in Indonesia in a randomised, double-blind trial. 20,543 subjects (age range 3-44 years) received either three doses of enteric coated capsules containing placebo or live Ty21a, or three doses of lyophilised placebo or live Ty21a reconstituted with phosphate buffer. During 30 months of follow-up, the rate of blood-culture-positive typhoid fever among controls was 810/100,000 per year. Rates of typhoid fever were 379/100,000 per year for subjects who received the liquid formulation of vaccine and 468/100,000 per year for subjects who received enteric coated capsules. The protective efficacies of the liquid and enteric coated formulations were 53% and 42%, respectively. Neither formulation protected against infection with Salmonella paratyphi A. No major side-effects were noted, but the overall incidence of side-effects was greater in the vaccine groups. Under conditions of intense transmission, Ty21a protected against typhoid fever; however, because Ty21a will not protect all individuals, there is a need for additional approaches to prevent the disease.When tested under conditions of moderate transmission of typhoid fever, a liquid formulation of the oral typhoid fever vaccine, Ty21a, had a protective efficacy of 96% in Egypt, and an enteric coated capsule formulation had an efficacy of 67% in Chile. The authors compared the 2 formulations under conditions of intense transmission of typhoid fever in Indonesia in a randomized, double blind trial. 20,543 subjects (age range 3-44 years) received either 3 doses of enteric-coated capsules containing placebo or live Ty21a, or 3 doses of lyophilized placebo or live Ty21a reconstituted with phosphate buffer. During 30 months of followup, the rate of blood-culture-positive typhoid fever among controls was 810/100,000/year. Rates of typhoid fever were 379/100,000/year for subjects who received the liquid formulation of vaccine and 468/100,000/year for subjects who received enteric coated capsules. The protective efficacies of the liquid and enteric coated formulations were 53% and 42%, respectively. Neither formulation protected against infection with Salmonella paratyphi A. No major side effects were noted, but the overall incidence of side effects was greater in the vaccine groups. Under conditions of intense transmission, Ty21a protected against typhoid fever; however since it will not protect all individuals, there is a need for additional approaches in prevention of the disease.Clinical and serological responses following primary and booster immunization with Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccines.Clinical and serum antibody responses following intramuscular injection of two formulations of Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide (Vi) were assessed in a double-blind evaluation. Healthy adults were randomly assigned to receive a 25 micrograms dose of liquid (Vi-Liq; n = 182) or freeze-dried Vi vaccine (Vi-Lyoph; n = 55), or placebo (n = 86). Erythema and/or induration > or = 1 cm in diameter at the injection site developed in 13/182 (7%) of Vi-Liq and 3/55 (5%) of Vi-Lyoph recipients (not significant, n.s.). Fever (oral temperature > or = 100 degrees F (37.8 degrees C)) occurred in < 2% of vaccinees. The frequencies of rises of fourfold or greater and of maximal Vi antibody levels were similar in the two vaccine groups. Fourfold or greater rises in serum Vi antibody levels (RIA) developed in 53% of Vi-Lyoph and 60% of Vi-Liq recipients by 1 week (n.s.), and 98 and 93%, respectively, by 1 month (n.s.). The frequencies of adverse reactions and mean Vi antibody levels following booster immunization with Vi-Liq 27 to 34 months after primary immunization (n = 55) were similar to those observed following primary immunization, although subjects given a booster dose were more likely to develop local reactions > or = 1 cm in diameter than those given a first dose (10/55 versus 13/182, p = 0.013 by the chi 2 test). Primary and booster immunizations with the Vi vaccines are well tolerated in healthy adults; mean Vi antibody levels remain significantly elevated for up to 34 months after primary immunization.A controlled field trial of liver oral typhoid vaccine Ty21a.A controlled field trial of a live oral typhoid vaccine was carried out in Alexandria, Egypt, in 1978-79. A total of 32 388 children were included in the study. They were divided in two comparable groups, one given 3 doses of the vaccine and the other 3 doses of the placebo. Each active dose contained 1 x 10(9)-8 x 10(9) live Ty21a bacteria. From March 1978 to March 1979, the population studied was followed up and suspected typhoid cases were investigated bacteriologically and serologically. The effectiveness of the vaccine was assessed by analysis of the incidence of typhoid fever in the two groups. The results of the follow-up indicate that, in the dosage schedule used, the Ty21a mutant strain, found previously to be stable and safe, is protective against typhoid fever for at least one year.Efficacy of Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine in South Africa.[Efficacy and side effects following immunization with Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine].Efficacy and side effects following the immunization with Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine (Vi) were assessed. The diluted solution (DS) of Vi was used as placebo. A total number of 777 children and adults were observed for side effect response. Mild and moderate fever appeared 16.93% and 0.05% in Vi group, 15.01% and 0.03% in DS group, respectively (statistically significant). Two cases with mild local reaction were observed in Vi group. A total number of 81,506 vaccinees were investigated on the efficacy of Vi vaccine, using positive blood culture of Salmonolla typhi as a diagnostic criterion. The protective rate and index of vaccine were 71.35% and 3.49% respectively. If 2 cases of positive Widal's test were included in, the protective rate would come up to 78.17% with a protective index 4.85. Clinical data showed that fever seen in the cases in Vi group was much lower than that of DS group. The systematic and local reaction of Vi vaccine were mild. The vaccine is safe and has high protective rate. It can also decrease the degree of fever with only one single dose as primary immunization. We believe Vi vaccine may serve as a vaccine of new generation to be promoted.Efficacy of one or two doses of Ty21a Salmonella typhi vaccine in enteric-coated capsules in a controlled field trial. Chilean Typhoid Committee.Typhoid fever remains an important public health problem in many areas of the world and an effective, non-reactogenic vaccine would be useful to control this disease. An attenuated Salmonella typhi strain (Ty21a), which has shown promise in previous trials, was evaluated in a controlled field trial in Santiago, Chile. In this trial, 82,543 schoolchildren were randomly assigned to receive one or two doses of Ty21a vaccine in enteric-coated capsules or placebo. The enteric-coated vaccine formulation was well tolerated and practical for mass oral immunization. In the first two years of surveillance, 213 cases of bacteriologically-confirmed typhoid fever were found in schoolchildren participating in the trial; annual rates in the placebo group were 139 and 227 per 100,000. Vaccine efficacy in the first two years after vaccination was 59% for two doses and 29% for one dose; no efficacy was found 3-5 years after vaccination. These results indicate that it will be necessary to identify a vaccine formulation and schedule for Ty21a S. typhi that is practical and provides high level protection for greater than 2 years.Immunogenicity, efficacy and serological correlate of protection of Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine three years after immunization.The protective efficacy and immunogenicity of Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine against typhoid fever was measured 3 years after its administration in a double-blind randomized trial. Vaccine efficacy was not significantly different during each year of the trial and was 55% (95% CI: 30-71%) over the 3 year period. In a case-control study at 3 years after vaccination, recipients of Vi had higher levels of Vi antibodies than controls, as measured by radio-immunoassay (GMT 1.28 vs 0.76 microgram ml-1, P = 0.0004) and by passive haemagglutination assay (GMT 10.46 vs 3.52, P = 0.0001). The serological correlate of protection has been estimated using the relative risks of typhoid fever in the 2 groups and the relative ratio of antibody levels. The estimated protective level is 1 microgram ml-1 suggesting that at a mean age of 9 years, 64% of vaccinates and 40% of controls had protective antibody against typhoid fever in this endemic area.A seven-year field trial of two typhoid vaccines in Guyana.Oral priming with Salmonella Typhi vaccine strain CVD 909 followed by parenteral boost with the S. Typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine induces CD27+IgD-S. Typhi-specific IgA and IgG B memory cells in humans.Attenuated live oral typhoid vaccine candidate CVD 909 constitutively expresses Salmonella Typhi capsular polysaccharide antigen (Vi). A randomized, double-blind, heterologous prime-boost clinical study was conducted to determine whether immunity to licensed parenteral Vi vaccine could be enhanced by priming with CVD 909. Priming with CVD 909 elicited higher and persistent, albeit not significant, anti-Vi IgG and IgA following immunization with Vi, than placebo-primed recipients. Vi-specific IgA B memory (B(M)) cells were significantly increased in CVD 909-primed subjects. S. Typhi-specific LPS and flagella IgA B(M) cells were observed in subjects immunized with CVD 909 or with the licensed Vi-negative oral typhoid vaccine Ty21a. CVD 909-induced B(M) cells exhibited a classical B(M) phenotype (i.e., CD3(-)CD19(+)IgD(-)CD27(+)). This is the first demonstration of classical B(M) cells specific for bacterial polysaccharide or protein antigens following typhoid immunization. The persistent IgA B(M) responses demonstrate the capacity of oral typhoid vaccines to prime mucosally relevant immune memory.Efficacy trial of Vi polysaccharide vaccine against typhoid fever in south-western China.To test the efficacy of locally produced Vi vaccine over a time period of longer than one year.A double-blinded, randomized field trial was performed in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in south-western China, using 30 micrograms doses of locally produced Vi. Enrolled subjects were 3-50 years of age, although the majority (92%) were school-aged children, who have the highest rate of typhoid fever in this setting. A total of 131,271 people were systematically allocated a single dose of 30 micrograms of Vi polysaccharide or saline placebo. The study population was followed for 19 months, with passive surveillance conducted in the Ministry of Health and the Regional Health and Anti-epidemic Centre (HAEC). Clinically suspected cases of typhoid fever were confirmed by blood culture, or by serological reaction with O-antigen (Widal tests).After 19 months, there were 23 culture-confirmed cases of typhoid fever in the placebo group versus 7 cases in the Vi group (Protective efficacy (PE) = 69%; 95% CI = 28%, 87%). Most of the isolates were from school-aged children: 22 cases in the placebo group versus 6 in the Vi group (PE = 72%; 95% CI = 32%, 82%). No serious post-injection reactions were observed. The locally produced Vi polysaccharide vaccine showed levels of protective efficacy similar to those for Vi vaccine produced in industrial countries.The slightly higher dose of vaccine did not seem to alter efficacy significantly in China.Controlled field trial of a high-dose oral killed typhoid vaccine in India.A controlled field trial of a modified vaccine containing Salmonella typhi, TY 2 strain, in a dose of 400 x 10(9) killed organisms per capsule, was carried out in schoolchildren aged 6-17 years. The children were followed up for 6-8 months. There were 66 cases of typhoid fever in the vaccine group (7312 children) and 54 in the control group (7292 children who had received a placebo). This difference is not statistically significant. The results confirm that, as found in earlier trials, oral typhoid vaccine, in the dosages used so far, gives no protection.Safety of live oral Salmonella typhi vaccine strains with deletions in htrA and aroC aroD and immune response in humans.A single-dose, oral Salmonella typhi vaccine strain has been sought as a carrier or vector of cloned genes encoding protective antigens of other pathogens. Such a hybrid vaccine, administered orally, would stimulate immune responses both at the mucosal surface and in the systemic compartment and would potentially provide protection against multiple pathogens. S. typhi CVD 908 and CVD 906, which harbor deletions in aroC and aroD, were further engineered by deletion in htrA to produce strains CVD 908-htrA and CVD 906-htrA, which are unable to sustain growth and are severely impaired in their ability to survive in host tissues. These strains were fed to humans at doses of 5 x 10(7) to 5 x 10(9) CFU with buffer, and safety and immune responses were assessed. CVD 908-htrA and CVD 906-htrA were well tolerated in volunteers; mild diarrhea in 3 of 36 volunteers and mild fever in 1 volunteer were the only notable adverse responses. The vaccine strains were not detected in blood cultures and only transiently detected in stool. Serum immune responses to S. typhi lipopolysaccharide and H antigens were observed in 75 to 100% of volunteers who received 5 x 10(8) to 5 x 10(9) CFU, and cells secreting S. typhi-specific antibodies were found in all volunteers after ingestion of either strain. Sixty-three percent to 83% of volunteers developed lymphoproliferative responses to S. typhi flagellar and particulate antigens after the higher doses. These studies demonstrate the potential of CVD 908-htrA as a live vector for the delivery of heterologous genes, and a clinical trial of such a construct is planned.Evaluation of a new Vi polysaccharide typhoid vaccine in children aged 2-5 years.Typhoid fever is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in many parts of the world. In view of the increasing resistance of Salmonella typhi against antibiotics and the high costs associated with improving sanitation conditions, vaccination programs would be of great benefit. We report on the evaluation of a new candidate VI (sic) polysaccharide typhoid vaccine (TypheriX (sic), SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals), tested in Filipino children aged 2-5 years where the profile was compared with that of a competitor-vaccine (Typhim (sic), Pasteur Merieux Connaught). Vaccination with the new candidate vaccine was followed by fewer general symptoms (2.9%) than with the competitor vaccine (14.1%), particularly with lower incidence of fever. The new candidate vaccine is also highly immunogenic: >99% of the vacinees were immune 28 days post vaccination with comparable GMTs of 3597 EL.U/ml for TypheriX (sic) and 3365 EL.U/ml for Typhim (sic). This trial shows that the available VI (sic) polysaccharide vaccines provide a reliable means in preventing a disease responsible for a significant morbidity and placing a heavy burden on health budgets.Effectiveness of oral killed typhoid vaccine.A controlled field trial of oral killed typhoid vaccine was carried out in Delhi, India in 1968-69. Altogether, 13 374 children below the age of 17 years were included in the study. Two comparable groups of children were given either placebo or vaccine. Each tablet of vaccine contained 100x10(9) killed Salmonella typhi, and 3 tablets of vaccine or placebo were administered to each child. The vaccinated subjects were followed up from 10 June 1968 to 31 August 1969. The effectiveness of the vaccine was measured by comparing the incidence of typhoid fever (based only on bacteriologically positive cases) in the two groups. It was found that the difference in incidence of the disease in the two groups was not statistically significant. The oral killed typhoid vaccine in the dosage schedule used in the present trial was found not to be effective against the disease.Safety and immunogenicity of Salmonella typhi Ty21a vaccine in young Thai children.Salmonella typhi Ty21a vaccine in a liquid formulation was evaluated in 634 Thai children 2 to 6 years of age. The seroconversion rate was 69% for those who received vaccine versus 14% for those who received placebo (P < 0.005). The immune responses among vaccine recipients ranged from 60% in 3-year-olds to 81% for 6-year-olds.A CONTROLLED FIELD TRIAL OF ACETONE-DRIED AND INACTIVATED AND HEAT-PHENOL-INACTIVED TYPHOID VACCINES IN BRITISH GUIANA.In 1960, some 72 000 schoolchildren in British Guiana participated in a controlled field trial of typhoid fever vaccines that was supported in part by the World Health Organization. The children were divided into three groups each receiving two doses, one of acetone-dried and inactivated vaccine, the second of heat-phenol-inactivated vaccine, and the third (control group) of tetanus toxoid. They were followed up over 3 1/2 years, during which time 99 cases of typhoid fever occurred in the control group, 6 in the acetone-dried vaccine group, and 26 in the heat-phenol vaccine group. Attack rates of the same order of magnitude were observed among 10 000 other children divided into the same three groups but given only one inoculation.The vaccines used were the same as those tested in a similar trial in Yugoslavia, and, although the attack rates in British Guiana were considerably lower in all groups than those in Yugoslavia, the findings in the two trials are in general agreement and indicate that acetone-dried vaccine confers greater protection than vaccine prepared from the same strains but inactivated by heat-phenol.The efficacy of a Salmonella typhi Vi conjugate vaccine in two-to-five-year-old children.Typhoid fever is common in developing countries. The licensed typhoid vaccines confer only about 70 percent immunity, do not protect young children, and are not used for routine vaccination. A newly devised conjugate of the capsular polysaccharide of Salmonella typhi, Vi, bound to nontoxic recombinant Pseudomonas aeruginosa exotoxin A (rEPA), has enhanced immunogenicity in adults and in children 5 to 14 years old and has elicited a booster response in children 2 to 4 years old.In a double-blind, randomized trial, we evaluated the safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy of the Vi-rEPA vaccine in children two to five years old in 16 communes in Dong Thap Province, Vietnam. Each of the 11,091 children received two injections six weeks apart of either Vi-rEPA or a saline placebo. Cases of typhoid, diagnosed by the isolation of S. typhi from blood cultures after 3 or more days of fever (a temperature of 37.5 degrees C or higher), were identified by active surveillance over a period of 27 months. We estimated efficacy by comparing the attack rate of typhoid in the vaccine group with that in the placebo group.S. typhi was isolated from 4 of the 5525 children who were fully vaccinated with Vi-rEPA and from 47 of the 5566 children who received both injections of placebo (efficacy, 91.5 percent; 95 percent confidence interval, 77.1 to 96.6; P<0.001). Among the 771 children who received only one injection, there was 1 case of typhoid in the vaccine group and 8 cases in the placebo group. Cases were distributed evenly among all age groups and throughout the study period. No serious adverse reactions were observed. In all 36 children studied four weeks after the second injection of the vaccine, levels of serum IgG Vi antibodies had increased by a factor of 10 or more.The Vi-rEPA conjugate typhoid vaccine is safe and immunogenic and has more than 90 percent efficacy in children two to five years old. The antibody responses and the efficacy suggest that this vaccine should be at least as protective in persons who are more than five years old.A controlled field trial and laboratory study of five typhoid vaccines in the USSR.A controlled field trial of typhoid vaccines was carried out in the USSR in 1962. It was the fifth and last of a series. Five preparations were tested, the most effective being a heat-killed divalent vaccine prepared from aerated broth culture. The results of a laboratory study of the vaccines were not in complete agreement with the data from the field trial. No correlation was found between the effectiveness of vaccines and the data from laboratory tests as to their potency, and the authors suggest that differences in effectiveness may be due to varying degrees of damage to biological components during the different production processes. The effectiveness is also sensitive to dosage.Effect of dosage on immunogenicity of a Vi conjugate vaccine injected twice into 2- to 5-year-old Vietnamese children.In a double-blind, randomized, and placebo-controlled previous trial, the efficacy of Vi-rEPA for typhoid fever in 2- to 5-year-olds was 89.0% for 46 months. Vi-rEPA contained 25 microg of Vi and induced a greater-than-eightfold rise in immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti-Vi in all of the vaccinees tested. In this investigation, we conducted a dosage-immunogenicity study of 5, 12.5, and 25 microg of Vi-rEPA in this age group. Two doses of Vi-rEPA were injected 6 weeks apart. Blood samples were taken before and at 10 weeks (4 weeks after the second injection) and 1 year later. All postimmunization geometric mean (GM) levels were higher than the preimmune levels (P < 0.0001). At 10 weeks, the GM IgG anti-Vi level elicited by 25 microg (102 EU/ml) was higher than those elicited by 12.5 microg (74.7 EU/ml) and 5 microg (43 EU/ml) (P < 0.004): all of the children had > or = 3.52 EU/ml (estimated minimum protective level). One year later, the levels declined about sevenfold (13.3 and 11.3 versus 6.43 EU/ml, P < 0.0001) but remained significantly higher than the preimmune levels (P < 0.0001), and >96% of the children had a greater-than-eightfold rise. This study also confirmed the safety and consistent immunogenicity of the four lots of Vi-rEPA used in this and previous trials.In a randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial, the single oral dose typhoid vaccine, M01ZH09, is safe and immunogenic at doses up to 1.7 x 10(10) colony-forming units.M01ZH09, S. Typhi (Ty2 Delta aroC Delta ssaV) ZH9, is a single oral dose typhoid vaccine with independently attenuating deletions. A phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-escalating trial evaluated the safety and immunogenicity of M01ZH09 to 1.7 x 10(10) colony-forming units (CFU). 187 Healthy adults received vaccine or placebo in four cohorts. Serologic responses and IgA ELISPOT were measured. At all doses, the vaccine was well tolerated and without bacteremias. One subject had a transient low-grade fever. 62.2-86.1% of subjects seroconverted S. Typhi-specific LPS IgG and 83.3-97.4% IgA; 92.1% had a positive S. Typhi LPS ELISPOT. M01ZH09 is safe and immunogenic up to 1.7 x 10(10)CFU. Efficacy testing of this single-dose oral typhoid vaccine is needed.A controlled field trial of the typhoid component of polyvalent enteric vaccine (NIISI polyvaccine).At the request of the Ministry of Health of the USSR, a controlled field trial of a polyvaccine containing typhoid, paratyphoid and dysentery antigens and a purified tetanus toxoid was undertaken in 1958. The main object of this trial, which was carried out over a 10-month period simultaneously in four localities, was to determine the efficacy of the typhoid component of the polyvaccine.The study population comprised over 90 000 individuals of 16-60 years of age. These were divided into two approximately equal groups, one of which received an injection of the polyvaccine under test and the other an injection of a preparation containing only the purified tetanus toxoid.The difference between the incidence of typhoid fever in the test group and that in the control group during the study period was statistically significant, and it was therefore concluded that a single injection of the polyvaccine afforded some protection against typhoid.A controlled field trial to evaluate the protective capacity of a single dose of acetone-killed agar-grown and heat-killed broth-grown typhoid vaccines.In a strictly controlled field trial among schoolchildren a study was made of the protective capacity of single doses of 2 typhoid vaccines: a heat-killed broth-grown sorbed dried vaccine made in the USSR (vaccine G-66) and an acetone-killed agar-grown dried vaccine (vaccine K-66) made in Yugoslavia. The latter vaccine was supplied by the World Health Organization.A single dose of these preparations exerted a statistically significant protective effect during the first 10 months of observation. The protection afforded by the acetone-killed and heat-killed sorbed vaccines was similar in duration and intensity to that resulting from single doses of other types of typhoid vaccines that had been evaluated earlier in the USSR. The data obtained confirm once again that successful immunization against typhoid is possible with a single dose of vaccine.The absence of any substantial difference in morbidity between the groups concerned indicates that the heat-killed broth-grown and acetone-killed agar-grown vaccines exert a roughly similar protective effect.Typhoid Vi: a less reactogenic vaccine.A typhoid vaccine derived from the purified Vi capsular polysaccharide (CPS) antigen of Salmonella typhi was compared with a heat-killed whole-cell typhoid vaccine in 637 healthy male volunteers. The individuals were placed in three groups: group 1 received two doses of heat-killed whole-cell typhoid vaccine, at an interval of 28 days; group 2 received a single dose of typhoid Vi CPS vaccine followed after 28 days by water for injection; and group 3 received water for injection on the first occasion and a single dose of typhoid Vi CPS vaccine 28 days later. Local and systemic adverse reactions were recorded for 5 days following each injection. Subjects receiving the typhoid Vi CPS vaccine complained of fewer local adverse reactions on each of the first 3 days following immunization: on day 1, 18.6% of subjects given typhoid Vi CPS vaccine reported local reactions compared with 59.7% of those receiving heat-killed whole-cell vaccine (P less than 0.001). The percentage of subjects receiving the heat-killed whole-cell vaccine who complained of systemic reactions was more than twice that of subjects receiving the Vi CPS vaccine (7.9% and 3.4%, respectively, on day 1; P less than 0.01).Controlled field trial of a typhoid vaccine prepared with a nonmotile mutant of Salmonella typhi Ty2.A controlled field trial was performed in Egypt to evaluate a whole cell typhoid vaccine prepared with a nonmotile mutant of S. typhi Ty2 (TNM1) devoid of flagellar antigen. This vaccine did not elicit an H antibody response, but significant Vi and O agglutinin responses were observed. There were 34 typhoid cases among 21 063 six- to seven-year-old children who received the TNM1 vaccine, and 44 cases among 21 017 children in the control group who received tetanus toxoid. These results suggest that TNM1 vaccine does not provide protection against typhoid fever, and that H antigen may be an important component of an effective vaccine.Safety, immunogenicity and dose ranging of a new Vi-CRM₁₉₇ conjugate vaccine against typhoid fever: randomized clinical testing in healthy adults.Typhoid fever causes more than 21 million cases of disease and 200,000 deaths yearly worldwide, with more than 90% of the disease burden being reported from Asia. Epidemiological data show high disease incidence in young children and suggest that immunization programs should target children below two years of age: this is not possible with available vaccines. The Novartis Vaccines Institute for Global Health developed a conjugate vaccine (Vi-CRM₁₉₇) for infant vaccination concomitantly with EPI vaccines, either starting at 6 weeks with DTP or at 9 months with measles vaccine. We report the results from a Phase 1 and a Phase 2 dose ranging trial with Vi-CRM₁₉₇ in European adults.Following randomized blinded comparison of single vaccination with either Vi-CRM₁₉₇ or licensed polysaccharide vaccines (both containing 25·0 µg of Vi antigen), a randomised observer blinded dose ranging trial was performed in the same center to compare three concentrations of Vi-CRM₁₉₇ (1·25 µg, 5·0 µg and 12·5 µg of Vi antigen) with the polysaccharide vaccine.All vaccines were well tolerated. Compared to the polysaccharide vaccine, Vi-CRM₁₉₇ induced a higher incidence of mild to moderate short lasting local pain. All Vi-CRM₁₉₇ formulations induced higher Vi antibody levels compared to licensed control, with clear dose response relationship.Vi-CRM₁₉₇ did not elicit safety concerns, was highly immunogenic and is therefore suitable for further clinical testing in endemic populations of South Asia.ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01123941 NCT01193907.Ty21a live oral typhoid vaccine and prevention of paratyphoid fever caused by Salmonella enterica Serovar Paratyphi B.In randomized, controlled field trials in Area Norte and Area Occidente of Santiago, Chile, 2 (Norte) or 3 (Occidente) doses of live oral typhoid vaccine Ty21a in enteric-coated capsules conferred protection against confirmed Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi disease (53% efficacy in Norte; 67% efficacy in Occidente) during 3 years of follow-up. There was also a trend in each trial showing protection against S. enterica serovar Paratyphi B disease (56% efficacy in Norte; 42% efficacy in Occidente). To enhance statistical power, an analysis was performed using pooled data from the 2 trials; this pooling of data was justified by the following facts: epidemiologic surveillance and microbiological methods were identical, the trials overlapped during 22 of the 36 months of follow-up in each trial, the estimates of efficacy against paratyphoid B fever in the 2 trials were roughly similar, and the ratio of follow-up of vaccine recipients to control subjects in both trials was ~1 : 1. In the pooled analysis, Ty21a conferred significant protection against paratyphoid B fever (efficacy, 49%; 95% confidence interval, 8%-73%; P=.019).Comparison of the immunogenicity and safety of two different brands of Salmonella typhi Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine.The recent emergence of multi-drug-resistant Salmonella strains highlights the need for better preventive measures, including vaccination. Safe and immunologic vaccines have been developed based on purified Vi polysaccharide.To compare the immune response elicited by two different brands of Salmonella Vi capsular polysaccharide vaccine (ViCPS).Double blind, randomized (3:1), controlled, parallel, phase III study was conducted at two centres in India to compare the safety and immunogenicity of Typbar, the investigational vaccine with an already marketed vaccine "X", in healthy subjects aged between 12 -25 years.A sample size of 184 subjects was calculated. Subjects were randomly distributed in two groups, immunized with single dose of Typbar or Vaccine "X". Serum samples were taken before 7 days and 4 weeks after immunization for the determination of antibodies to Vi polysaccharide, by ELISA method. Safety was assessed by physical examination, laboratory parameters before and after vaccination and by monitoring adverse events.The geometric mean antibody titre (GMT) 4 weeks after vaccination was compared from respective pre-vaccination values by Wilcoxon signed rank test. Geometric mean of antibody levels before and after immunization and the ratio between them (Mann-Whitney test), the Seroconversion rates (Z test of proportions) and the adverse events (Fisher's exact test and Chi square test), were compared between two groups. P value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. P values and 95% confidence intervals were estimated in two-tailed fashion.153 subjects (Typbar =116 and Vaccine "X" =37) were studied. 71.6% (95% CI=63.4%-79.8%) and 75.7% (95% CI=64.9% - 89.5%) were the seroconversion rates with Typbar and vaccine "X" respectively. The GMT values for Vi antibodies induced after Typbar and vaccine "X" were 10.23 Typbar and 13.46 mg/mL respectively and these values showed high significance when compared to their respective pre-immunization GMT values (P<0.0001) at 95% CI (-10.49 to -7.19 mg/mL for Typbar and -14.69 to -8.86 mg/mL for Vaccine "X"). The induction of antibody response appeared to be slightly stronger (P=0.032) with vaccine "X" when compared to that of Typbar. This is justifiable as the same group also had high pre-immunization GMT values (P=0.021).The immunogenicity and safety of the investigational vaccine Typbar was found to be similar to that of already marketed brand of Vi CPS, Vaccine "X". The availability of a single dose of vaccine that is safe and effective enhances the prospective for control of typhoid fever.A CONTROLED FIELD TRIAL OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF ACETONE-DRIED AND INACTIVATED AND HEAT-PHENOL-INACTIVATED TYPHOID VACCINES IN YUGOSLAVIA.In 1954-60 a Yugoslav Typhoid Commission showed in the first controlled field trial of typhoid vaccines, carried out in Osijek, Yugoslavia, that heat-phenol-inactivated typhoid vaccine gave a relatively high and long-lasting immunity. However, this liquid vaccine preparation was unstable and laboratory potency tests were inconclusive, and it was therefore decided that stable, dried, heat-killed, phenol-preserved vaccine be tested together with an acetone-inactivated and -dried vaccine in controlled field trials, supported in part by the World Health Organization, in Yugoslavia and British Guiana.This is report on the controlled trials organized in two Yugoslav towns, Bitola and Pristina. Three comparable groups were formed by random allocation of vaccines among 45 497 volunteers in the two towns. In each town one group received heat-phenol vaccine, the second group acetone-dried vaccine and the third (control) group tetanus toxoid. Two doses were given four weeks apart in the spring of 1960 and the vaccinated persons were followed up for 2 1/2 years. The effectiveness of the vaccines was measured by comparing typhoid morbidity rates in the three groups. It was found during an outbreak of typhoid fever in Pristina two years after primary vaccination that both the acetone-dried and the heat-phenol vaccines were effective, the former being superior.Efficacy of a locally produced, Chinese Vi polysaccharide typhoid fever vaccine during six years of follow-up.A locally produced Vi polysaccharide vaccine against typhoid fever was licensed in China following two placebo-controlled, efficacy trials conducted in the early 1990s in Baoying, Jiangsu Province, and Quan-zhou, Guangxi Province. The two trials each enrolled over 80,000 participants and followed participants for 12 and 19 months post-vaccination, respectively. To define the long-term efficacy of this vaccine, we retrospectively assessed the occurrence of typhoid fever, diagnosed with clinical and serological criteria, in the two study populations for 6 years following vaccination. During the second year following vaccination, vaccine efficacy was 100% (95% CI: 17%, 100%) in Baoying and 85% (95% CI: 49%, 96%) in Quan-zhou. There was suggestive protection (51%; PE: -95%, 88%) during the third year in Baoying, nearly identical to the level observed in the third year of an earlier trial in South Africa. These results confirm that this vaccine protects for at least 2 years, and are consistent with the assertion that the vaccine protects for at least 3 years.Vi antigen from Salmonella typhosa and immunity against typhoid fever. 11. Safety and antigenicity in humans.Safety and antigenicity of a purified preparation of Salmonella typhosa Vi antigen was evaluated in human volunteers. Dosages of Vi antigen at 25, 50, and 100 mug were less toxic than U.S. standard typhoid vaccine (lot 6A) containing 5 X 10(8) bacteria per dosage. Vi antigen in comparison with the standard typhoid vaccine induced higher hemagglutinating antibody but lower bactericidal antibody responses.Ineffectiveness of an oral killed typhoid vaccine in a field trial.A field trial was carried out with a vaccine containing 300x10(9) killed S. typhi (strain Ty58) per tablet. A total of 12 564 children aged 1-15 years were given 3 tablets of the vaccine or a placebo at the rate of one tablet on each of 3 consecutive days. The results indicated that the vaccine, in its present form and at this dosage, gives no protection.Comparison of enteric-coated capsules and liquid formulation of Ty21a typhoid vaccine in randomised controlled field trial.In a randomised, double-blind, controlled field trial in Santiago, Chile, 81,621 schoolchildren aged 5-19 years received three doses, within a week, of attenuated Salmonella typhi oral vaccine Ty21a in enteric-coated capsules or in a new liquid suspension, or placebo. Over 36 months of surveillance, the liquid formulation (76.9% vaccine efficacy) was significantly superior to the enteric-coated capsules (33.2% vaccine efficacy). The liquid formulation protected young children (5-9 years) (efficacy 82.3%) as well as older children (efficacy 69.3%), whereas the capsules significantly protected only older children. The liquid suspension was easy to prepare by mixing lyophilised vaccine with buffer in water and was easily administered, even to the youngest children. Thus, the liquid formulation of Ty21a is preferable to enteric-coated capsules.Using a Human Challenge Model of Infection to Measure Vaccine Efficacy: A Randomised, Controlled Trial Comparing the Typhoid Vaccines M01ZH09 with Placebo and Ty21a.Typhoid persists as a major cause of global morbidity. While several licensed vaccines to prevent typhoid are available, they are of only moderate efficacy and unsuitable for use in children less than two years of age. Development of new efficacious vaccines is complicated by the human host-restriction of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (S. Typhi) and lack of clear correlates of protection. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the protective efficacy of a single dose of the oral vaccine candidate, M01ZH09, in susceptible volunteers by direct typhoid challenge.We performed a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial in healthy adult participants at a single centre in Oxford (UK). Participants were allocated to receive one dose of double-blinded M01ZH09 or placebo or 3-doses of open-label Ty21a. Twenty-eight days after vaccination, participants were challenged with 104CFU S. Typhi Quailes strain. The efficacy of M01ZH09 compared with placebo (primary outcome) was assessed as the percentage of participants reaching pre-defined endpoints constituting typhoid diagnosis (fever and/or bacteraemia) during the 14 days after challenge. Ninety-nine participants were randomised to receive M01ZH09 (n = 33), placebo (n = 33) or 3-doses of Ty21a (n = 33). After challenge, typhoid was diagnosed in 18/31 (58.1% [95% CI 39.1 to 75.5]) M01ZH09, 20/30 (66.7% [47.2 to 87.2]) placebo, and 13/30 (43.3% [25.5 to 62.6]) Ty21a vaccine recipients. Vaccine efficacy (VE) for one dose of M01ZH09 was 13% [95% CI -29 to 41] and 35% [-5 to 60] for 3-doses of Ty21a. Retrospective multivariable analyses demonstrated that pre-existing anti-Vi antibody significantly reduced susceptibility to infection after challenge; a 1 log increase in anti-Vi IgG resulting in a 71% decrease in the hazard ratio of typhoid diagnosis ([95% CI 30 to 88%], p = 0.006) during the 14 day challenge period. Limitations to the study included the requirement to limit the challenge period prior to treatment to 2 weeks, the intensity of the study procedures and the high challenge dose used resulting in a stringent model.Despite successfully demonstrating the use of a human challenge study to directly evaluate vaccine efficacy, a single-dose M01ZH09 failed to demonstrate significant protection after challenge with virulent Salmonella Typhi in this model. Anti-Vi antibody detected prior to vaccination played a major role in outcome after challenge.ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT01405521) and EudraCT (number 2011-000381-35).Controlled field trials of three different oral killed typhoid vaccines in India.Three vaccination trials against typhoid fever were carried out in 1968/69, 1970/71 and 1974 in New Dehli. The vaccine was generally administered in tablet form on three consecutive days. Each new trial consisted of a larger number of killed bacteria: 100.10(9), then 300.10(9) and finally 400.10(9) killed S. typhi. The placebo and vaccinated groups were composed of 6,000 to 7,000 persons, sometimes only children from 6 to 17 years. The number of typhoid fever cases which appeared under normal conditions of infection did not show significant difference between the vaccinated and non-vaccinated subjects during the 18 month period of observation.Immunogenicity and safety of the Vi-CRM197 conjugate vaccine against typhoid fever in adults, children, and infants in south and southeast Asia: results from two randomised, observer-blind, age de-escalation, phase 2 trials.Typhoid vaccination is a public health priority in developing countries where young children are greatly affected by typhoid fever. Because present vaccines are not recommended for children younger than 2 years, the Novartis Vaccines Institute for Global Health developed a conjugate vaccine (Vi-CRM197) for infant immunisation. We aimed to assess the immunogenicity and safety of Vi-CRM197 in participants of various ages in endemic countries in south and southeast Asia.We did two randomised, observer-blind, age de-escalation, phase 2 trials at two sites in Pakistan and India (study A), and at one site in the Philippines (study B), between March 2, 2011, and Aug 9, 2012. Adults aged 18-45 years, children aged 24-59 months, older infants aged 9-12 months, and infants aged 6-8 weeks were randomly assigned (1:1) with a computer-generated randomisation list (block size of four) to receive either 5 μg Vi-CRM197 or 25 μg Vi-polysaccharide vaccine (or 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in children younger than 2 years). Both infant populations received Vi-CRM197 concomitantly with vaccines of the Expanded Programme on Immunization (EPI), according to WHO schedule. With the exception of designated study site personnel responsible for vaccine preparation, study investigators, those assessing outcomes, and data analysts were masked to treatment allocation. We specified no a-priori null hypothesis for the immunogenicity or safety objectives and all analyses were descriptive. Analyses were by modified intention-to-treat. These studies are registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, numbers NCT01229176 and NCT01437267.320 participants were enrolled and vaccinated in the two trials: 200 in study A (all age groups) and 120 in study B (children and infants only), of whom 317 (99%) were included in the modified intention-to-treat analysis. One dose of Vi-CRM197 significantly increased concentrations of anti-Vi antibody in adults (from 113 U/mL [95% CI 67-190] to 208 U/mL [117-369]), children (201 U/mL [138-294] to 368 U/mL [234-580]), and older infants (179 U/mL [129-250] to 249 U/mL [130-477]). However, in children and older infants, a second dose of conjugate vaccine had no incremental effect on antibody titres and, at all ages, concentrations of antibodies increased substantially 6 months after vaccination (from 55 U/mL [33-94] to 63 U/mL [35-114] in adults, from 23 U/mL [15-34] to 51 U/mL [34-76] in children, and from 21 U/mL [14-31] to 22 U/mL [14-33] in older infants). Immune response in infants aged 6-8 weeks was lower than that in older participants and, 6 months after third vaccination, antibody concentrations were significantly higher than pre-vaccination concentrations in Filipino (21 U/mL [16-28] vs 2.88 U/mL [1.95-4.25]), but not Pakistani (3.76 U/mL [2.77-5.08] vs 2.77 U/mL [2.1-3.66]), infants. Vi-CRM197 was safe and well tolerated and did not induce any significant interference with EPI vaccines. No deaths or vaccine-related serious adverse events were reported throughout the studies.Vi-CRM197 is safe and immunogenic in endemic populations of all ages. Given at 9 months of age, concomitantly with measles vaccine, Vi-CRM197 shows a promise for potential inclusion in EPI schedules of countries endemic for typhoid. An apparent absence of booster response and a reduction in antibody titres 6 months after immunisation should be further investigated, but data show that an immunogenic typhoid vaccine can be safely delivered to infants during EPI visits recommended by WHO.Sclavo Vaccines Association and Regione Toscana.Revaccination with locally-produced vi typhoid polysaccharide vaccine among chinese school-aged children: safety and immunogenicity findings.To evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of revaccination with locally-produced Vi polysaccharide vaccine 3 years after the first dose in Chinese children aged 9 to 14 years.A randomized, placebo-controlled trial was conducted in Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. Six hundred and sixty-seven eligible children who had previously received a primary dose of Vi vaccine were randomly assigned to receive 1 dose of 30 mug Vi vaccine or placebo. In addition, 331 eligible children received 1 dose of Vi polysaccharide vaccine as a primary vaccination. Adverse events were followed for 28 days after vaccination. Serum samples were collected from a subgroup of participants on day 0 and day 28, and Vi antibodies were analyzed using a passive hemagglutination method.Revaccination was found to be safe and immunogenic. No severe adverse events were observed. A significant increase in antibody titers after vaccination was observed among children who had and had not been previously vaccinated. Twenty-eight days after injection, the seropositive rate was 79% in both revaccination and primary injection groups; the geometric mean antibody titer was 1:40 in the primary injection group and 1:29 in the revaccination group (P = 0.24). Although the difference of attained geometric mean titers in follow-up sera was not significantly different in these 2 groups, the fold-rise of these titers from baseline was significantly higher in the primary injection group than in the revaccination group (7.7 versus 3.1, P < 0.001).We found that revaccination using the locally produced Vi polysaccharide vaccine among Chinese school-aged children was safe and increased antibody titers. Revaccination can be used to extend the duration of protection provided by Vi polysaccharide vaccine.Duration of efficacy of Ty21a, attenuated Salmonella typhi live oral vaccine.Currently, two different formulations of Ty21a live oral typhoid vaccine are commercialized. The enteric-coated capsule formulation was licensed based on results of three years of follow-up of a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind field trial in Area Occidente, Santiago, Chile, which demonstrated that three doses of this formulation, given on an every other day immunization schedule, conferred the best protection among several options evaluated. Subsequently, a liquid formulation (lyophilized vaccine organisms reconstituted with buffer and water into a vaccine cocktail) was commercialized after it was shown to provide superior protection than enteric-coated capsules over three years of follow-up in a randomized, placebo-controlled field trial in Area Sur Oriente and Area Norte, Santiago. Surveillance in the Area Occidente trial was continued for four additional years (i.e., total seven years of follow-up) and in the Area Sur Oriente/Area Norte trial for two additional years (i.e., a total of five years of follow-up). These additional surveillance data, which were analyzed to ascertain the longevity of protection conferred by these formulations of Ty21a, revealed that three doses of Ty21a in enteric-coated capsules (every other day schedule) conferred 67% protection over three years and 62% protection over seven years of follow-up, whereas three doses of liquid formulation (every other day schedule) elicited 77% protection over three years and 78% over five years of follow-up. Based on its excellent clinical acceptability, ease of oral administration, proven practicality in school-based mass immunization, and long-term efficacy enduring at least seven years, it is proposed that school-based immunization with Ty21a be utilized as a control measure in areas where the incidence of typhoid fever is high and Salmonella typhi are antibiotic-resistant.Evaluation of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi (Ty2 aroC-ssaV-) M01ZH09, with a defined mutation in the Salmonella pathogenicity island 2, as a live, oral typhoid vaccine in human volunteers.Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi strains with mutations in the Salmonella pathogenicity island-2 (SPI-2) may represent an effective strategy for human vaccine development, and a vectoring system for heterologous antigens. S. Typhi (Ty2 aroC-ssaV-) M01ZH09 is an attenuated, live, oral typhoid vaccine harboring defined deletion mutations in ssaV, which encodes an integral component in the SPI-2 type III secretion system (TTSS), as well as a mutation in an aromatic biosynthetic pathway needed for bacterial growth in vivo (aroC). SPI-2 mutant vaccines have yet to be evaluated in a large, randomized human trial. A simplified or single-oral dose oral typhoid vaccine using the SPI-2 strategy would offer significant advantages over the currently licensed typhoid vaccines. We performed a double-blinded, placebo-controlled, dose-escalating clinical trial in 60 healthy adult volunteers to determine the tolerability and immunogenicity of a single dose of M01ZH09. Three groups of 20 healthy adult volunteers were enrolled; 16 in each group received a single oral dose of the freeze-dried vaccine at 5 x 10(7), 5 x 10(8) or 5 x 10(9)CFU in a bicarbonate buffer. Four volunteers in each cohort received placebo in the same buffer. Adverse events were infrequent and not statistically different between vaccine and placebo recipients, although two subjects in the mid-range dose and three subjects in the highest dose had temperature measurements >37.5 degrees C. No blood or urine cultures were positive for M01ZH09, and fecal shedding was brief. The immune response was dose-related; the highest vaccine dose (5 x 10(9)CFU) was the most immunogenic. All tested subjects receiving the highest dose had a significant ASC response (mean 118 spots/10(6) cells). A >or=4-fold increase in antibody titer for S. Typhi LPS or flagellin was detected in 75% of volunteers in the highest-dose cohort by day 28. The SPI-2 mutant vaccine, M01ZH09, is a promising typhoid vaccine candidate and deserves further study as a vectoring system for heterologous vaccine antigens.A cluster-randomized effectiveness trial of Vi typhoid vaccine in India.Typhoid fever remains an important cause of illness and death in the developing world. Uncertainties about the protective effect of Vi polysaccharide vaccine in children under the age of 5 years and about the vaccine's effect under programmatic conditions have inhibited its use in developing countries.We conducted a phase 4 effectiveness trial in which slum-dwelling residents of Kolkata, India, who were 2 years of age or older were randomly assigned to receive a single dose of either Vi vaccine or inactivated hepatitis A vaccine, according to geographic clusters, with 40 clusters in each study group. The subjects were then followed for 2 years.A total of 37,673 subjects received a dose of a study vaccine. The mean rate of vaccine coverage was 61% for the Vi vaccine clusters and 60% for the hepatitis A vaccine clusters. Typhoid fever was diagnosed in 96 subjects in the hepatitis A vaccine group, as compared with 34 in the Vi vaccine group, with no subject having more than one episode. The level of protective effectiveness for the Vi vaccine was 61% (95% confidence interval [CI], 41 to 75; P<0.001 for the comparison with the hepatitis A vaccine group). Children who were vaccinated between the ages of 2 and 5 years had a level of protection of 80% (95% CI, 53 to 91). Among unvaccinated members of the Vi vaccine clusters, the level of protection was 44% (95% CI, 2 to 69). The overall level of protection among all residents of Vi vaccine clusters was 57% (95% CI, 37 to 71). No serious adverse events that were attributed to either vaccine were observed during the month after vaccination.The Vi vaccine was effective in young children and protected unvaccinated neighbors of Vi vaccinees. The potential for combined direct and indirect protection by Vi vaccine should be considered in future deliberations about introducing this vaccine in areas where typhoid fever is endemic. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00125008.)Safety and immunogenicity of a live oral bivalent typhoid fever (Salmonella typhi Ty21a)-cholera (Vibrio cholerae CVD 103-HgR) vaccine in healthy adults.The safety and immunogenicity of the live oral attenuated vaccine strains vibrio cholerae CVD 103-HgR and Salmonella typhi Ty21a were evaluated alone or in a combined bivalent formulation in four groups composed of 185 healthy European adults. All presentations were well tolerated. The serum anti-S. typhi lipopolysaccharide immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin A antibody responses were comparable for all groups (66 to 72% seroconversion). The serum vibriocidal antibody seroconversion rate ranged from 78 to 92.5% (P > 0.05) among the groups. However, the peak and geometric mean vibriocidal antibody titers were significantly higher (P < 0.005) in the groups which received the bivalent formulation along with two doses of Ty21a than in the group which received CVD 103-HgR followed by two doses of killed Escherichia coli K-12 placebo. The ingestion of a placebo shortly after CVD 103-HgR may have suppressed the magnitude of the immune response. These findings demonstrate the feasibility of producing multivalent live oral attenuated vaccines.Safety and immunogenicity of a Vi polysaccharide-tetanus toxoid conjugate vaccine (Typbar-TCV) in healthy infants, children, and adults in typhoid endemic areas: a multicenter, 2-cohort, open-label, double-blind, randomized controlled phase 3 study.Enteric fever caused by Salmonella Typhi remains a major public health problem in developing countries. Typbar-TCV is a single-dose typhoid Vi polysaccharide-tetanus toxoid conjugate vaccine for persons ≥6 months of age.Six hundred fifty-four healthy subjects aged 2-45 years enrolled in a double-blind, randomized controlled trial (RCT) received a single dose of Typbar-TCV or comparator "Vi polysaccharide" (Typbar), and 327 healthy subjects aged 6-23 months received a single dose of Typbar-TCV in an open-label trial (OLT); both received single- or multidose presentations from different lots. After 2 years, subsets in each group received a booster dose. The primary objective included analysis of geometric mean titer (GMTs) and 4-fold rise of anti-Vi serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay titers over baseline (seroconversion [SCN]) 42 days after immunization.Typbar-TCV recipients in the RCT attained higher anti-Vi IgG GMTs 42 days after immunization (SCN, 97%; GMT, 1293 [95% confidence interval {CI}, 1153-1449]) than recipients of Typbar (SCN, 93%; GMT, 411 [95% CI, 359-471]) (P < .001). Typbar-TCV was highly immunogenic in the OLT (SCN, 98%; GMT, 1937 [95% CI, 1785-2103]). Two years after vaccination, anti-Vi titers remained higher in Typbar-TCV subjects (GMT, 82 [95% CI, 73-92]); and exhibited higher avidity (geometric mean avidity index [GMAI], 60%) than in Typbar recipients (GMT, 46 [95% CI, 40-53]; GMAI 46%) in the RCT (P < .001). OLT Typbar-TCV recipients achieved GMT of 48 (95% CI, 42-55) and GMAI of 57%. Typbar-TCV induced multiple IgG subclasses and strong booster responses in all ages. No serious vaccine-attributable adverse events were observed.Single-dose Typbar-TCV is well tolerated and induces robust and long-lasting serum anti-Vi IgG across age groups.CTRI/2011/08/001957, CTRI/2014/01/004341.The feasibility of a school-based VI polysaccharide vaccine mass immunization campaign in Hue City, central Vietnam: streamlining a typhoid fever preventive strategy.We report the coverage, safety, and logistics of a school-based typhoid fever immunization campaign that took place in Hue City, central Vietnam; a typhoid fever endemic area. A cluster-randomized evaluation-blinded controlled trial was designed where 68 schools (cluster) were randomly allocated the single dose Vi polysaccharide vaccine (Typherix) or the active control hepatitis A vaccine (Havrix). A safety surveillance system was implemented. A total of 32,267 children were immunized with a coverage of 57.5%. Strong predictors for vaccination were attending primary schools, peri-urban location of the school, and low family income. Human resources were mainly schoolteachers and the campaign was completed in about 1 month. Most adverse events reported were mild. Safe injection and safe sharp-waste disposal practices were followed. A typhoid fever school-based immunization campaign was safe and logistically possible. Coverage was moderate and can be interpreted as the minimum that could have been achievable because individual written informed consent procedures were sought for the first time in Hue City and the trial nature of the campaign. The lessons learned, together with cost-effectiveness results to be obtained by the end of follow-up period, will hopefully accelerate the introduction of Vi typhoid fever vaccine in Vietnam.Safety and efficacy of combined meningococcal and typhoid vaccine.Effectiveness of Vi capsular polysaccharide typhoid vaccine among children: a cluster randomized trial in Karachi, Pakistan.Typhoid fever is endemic in Karachi, with an incidence among children ranging from 170 to 450 per 100,000 child-years. Vaccination strategies are important for prevention, and the Vi capsular polysaccharide (ViCPS) vaccine has been shown to be effective in reducing the burden of typhoid fever.A cluster randomized trial was conducted in three low socioeconomic urban squatter settlements in Karachi, Pakistan between 2002 and 2007. Subsamples were followed up for assessment of immune response and adverse events after vaccination.The study participants were similar in a wide variety of socio-demographic and economic characteristics at baseline. A total of 27,231 individuals of the total target population of 51,965 in 120 clusters either received a ViCPS vaccine (13,238 [52% coverage]) or the control Hepatitis A vaccine (13,993 [53%]). Typhoid fever was diagnosed in 30 ViCPS vaccine recipients and 49 Hepatitis A vaccine recipients with an adjusted total protective effectiveness of 31% (95%CI: -28%, 63%). The adjusted total vaccine protective effectiveness was -38% (95%CI: -192%, 35%) for children aged 2-5 years and 57% (95%CI: 6%, 81%) for children 5-16 years old.The ViCPS vaccine did not confer statistically significant protection to children in the study areas, and there was a decline in antibody response 2 years post-vaccination. However, the ViCPS vaccine showed significant total protection in children 5-16 years of age, which is consistent with other studies of ViCPS vaccine conducted in India, Nepal, China and South Africa. These findings suggest that ViCPS vaccination of school-aged children will protect the children of urban, typhoid endemic areas against typhoid fever.