Failure to preserve fertility in patients with Hodgkin's disease.The hypothesis that the "down-regulated" gonad is less vulnerable to the effects of cytotoxic chemotherapy for advanced Hodgkin's disease has been investigated. Thirty men and eighteen women were randomly allocated to receive an agonist analogue of gonadotrophin-releasing hormone prior to, and for the duration of, cytotoxic chemotherapy. Buserelin (d-Ser-[TBU]6 LHRH ethylamide) was prescribed in two different dosage schedules to twenty men, and in a single dosage schedule to eight women. A standard gonadotrophin-releasing hormone test (GnRH 100 micrograms) was performed 1 week prior to and on day 1 of each cycle of chemotherapy. In all patients peak luteinizing hormone responses to GnRH were suppressed throughout treatment. The higher of the two dosage schedules used in the men caused more effective suppression of luteinizing hormone, and both regimens led to an initial suppression of peak follicle-stimulating hormone responses to GnRH, which was not maintained. At follow-up assessment up to 3 years from the completion of treatment, all men treated with buserelin were profoundly oligospermic and four of the eight women were amenorrhoeic. All ten male controls were profoundly oligospermic, and six of nine female controls were amenorrhoeic. In the dosages and schedules investigated, buserelin was ineffective in conserving fertility.Adjuvant chemotherapy followed by goserelin compared with either modality alone: the impact on amenorrhea, hot flashes, and quality of life in premenopausal patients--the International Breast Cancer Study Group Trial VIII.The purpose of this article is to compare quality of life (QOL) and menopausal symptoms among premenopausal patients with lymph node-negative breast cancer receiving chemotherapy, goserelin, or their sequential combination, and to investigate differential effects by age.We evaluated QOL data from 874 pre- and perimenopausal women with lymph node-negative breast cancer who were randomly assigned to receive six courses of classical cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF) chemotherapy, ovarian suppression with goserelin for 24 months, or six courses of classical CMF followed by 18 months of goserelin. We report QOL data collected during 3 years after random assignment in patients without disease recurrence.Overall, patients receiving goserelin alone showed a marked improvement or less deterioration in QOL measures over the first 6 months than those patients treated with CMF. There were no differences at 3 years after random assignment according to treatment except for hot flashes. As reflected in the hot flashes scores, patients in all three treatment groups experienced induced amenorrhea, but the onset of ovarian function suppression was slightly delayed for patients receiving chemotherapy. Younger patients (< 40 years) who received goserelin alone returned to their premenopausal status at 6 months after the cessation of therapy, while those who received CMF showed marginal changes from their baseline hot flashes scores.Age-adjusted risk profiles that consider patient-reported outcomes enable patients to adapt to their disease and treatment, such as considering the trade-offs between delayed endocrine symptoms, but higher risk of permanent menopause with chemotherapy, and immediate but reversible endocrine symptoms with goserelin, in younger premenopausal patients.Adjuvant goserelin and ovarian preservation in chemotherapy treated patients with early breast cancer: results from a randomized trial.The purpose of this randomized study was to examine if goserelin concomitant to CMF-chemotherapy as adjuvant treatment for premenopausal breast cancer, protects the ovaries from premature failure. A total of 285 premenopausal breast cancer patients, in a randomized adjuvant trial (Zoladex in premenopausal patients (ZIPP)), were assigned to a study on ovarian function. Node positive patients were assigned to CMF-(cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil) chemotherapy in addition to endocrine therapy. All patients were randomly assigned to receive 2 years of goserelin, goserelin plus tamoxifen, tamoxifen alone or no endocrine treatment. We studied, if menses were affected in the treatment groups, up to 36 months after randomization. One year after completed CMF- and endocrine therapy, 36% of the women in the goserelin group reported menses, compared to 7% in the goserelin plus tamoxifen group, 13% in the tamoxifen group and 10% of the controls. Among women treated with goserelin, there was a statistically significant increase in the proportion of menstruating women, 1 year after completed treatment compared to at 24 months of treatment (P = 0.006), in contrast to all other treatment groups, who were unchanged or more often amenorrheic. In our study, there is some evidence of protective effect of goserelin on ovarian function in CMF treated women. This effect was not observed in the combined tamoxifen and goserelin treatment.Effect of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue triptorelin on the occurrence of chemotherapy-induced early menopause in premenopausal women with breast cancer: a randomized trial.Premenopausal patients with breast cancer are at high risk of premature ovarian failure induced by systemic treatments, but no standard strategies for preventing this adverse effect are yet available.To determine the effect of the temporary ovarian suppression obtained by administering the gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue triptorelin during chemotherapy on the incidence of early menopause in young patients with breast cancer undergoing adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy.The PROMISE-GIM6 (Prevention of Menopause Induced by Chemotherapy: A Study in Early Breast Cancer Patients-Gruppo Italiano Mammella 6) study, a parallel, randomized, open-label, phase 3 superiority trial, was conducted at 16 sites in Italy and enrolled 281 patients between October 2003 and January 2008. The patients were premenopausal women with stage I through III breast cancer who were candidates for adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Assuming a 60% rate of early menopause in the group treated with chemotherapy alone, it was estimated that 280 patients had to be enrolled to detect a 20% absolute reduction in early menopause in the group treated with chemotherapy plus triptorelin. The intention-to-treat analysis was performed by including all randomized patients and using imputed values for missing data.Before beginning chemotherapy, patients were randomly allocated to receive chemotherapy alone or combined with triptorelin. Triptorelin was administered intramuscularly at a dose of 3.75 mg at least 1 week before the start of chemotherapy and then every 4 weeks for the duration of chemotherapy.Incidence of early menopause (defined as no resumption of menstrual activity and postmenopausal levels of follicle-stimulating hormone and estradiol 1 year after the last cycle of chemotherapy).The clinical and tumor characteristics of the 133 patients randomized to chemotherapy alone and the 148 patients randomized to chemotherapy plus triptorelin were similar. Twelve months after the last cycle of chemotherapy (last follow-up, August 18, 2009), the rate of early menopause was 25.9% in the chemotherapy-alone group and 8.9% in the chemotherapy plus triptorelin group, an absolute difference of -17% (95% confidence interval, -26% to -7.9%; P < .001). The odds ratio for treatment-related early menopause was 0.28 (95% confidence interval, 0.14 to 0.59; P < .001).The use of triptorelin-induced temporary ovarian suppression during chemotherapy in premenopausal patients with early-stage breast cancer reduced the occurrence of chemotherapy-induced early menopause.clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00311636.Evaluation of the effect of GnRH agonist on menstrual reverse in breast cancer cases treated with cyclophosphamide.Twenty-five percent of breast cancer cases are detected during premenopausal period and the number of young women suffering from breast cancer is increasing in the world, especially in Iran. Preservation of fertility and ovarian function leads to improved quality of life of these patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) agonist on menstrual reverse in breast cancer cases treated with cyclophosphamide regimen.This randomized clinical trial (RCT) was conducted on 42 adenocarcinoma cases. Mean age of patients was 37 +/- 5 years (range 25 to 45). Primary stages to Stage II (T2N1M0) whose histology reports were negative ER/PR were enrolled in this study. All the enrolled patients were candidates for cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2), adriamycin (60 mg/m2), and taxoter (75 mg/m2) chemotherapy regimens.Spontaneous menstrual reverse occurred in 90.5% of patients receiving diphereline at three to six months after treatment which occurred in 33.3% of control cases. In control group, 14.3% (three cases) had oligomenorrhea and hypomenorrhea during chemotherapy and 19%(four cases) had spontaneous menstrual reverse at three to six months. It should be noted that there was a significant difference between controls and cases (p < 0.001). This difference was insignificant in cases younger than 35 years (p < 0.594). In 100% of patients older than 35 years who received diphereline, spontaneous menstrual reverse occurred during six months after chemotherapy, but this occurred in only 20% of controls (p < 0.001). Mean serum level of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) during and at three months after therapy was significantly lower in cases in comparison with controls, but serum level of estradiol was significantly more in cases three months after chemotherapy (p < 0.001).GnRH agonists significantly improve ovarian function andfertility. They also lead to spontaneous menstrual reverse in negative ER/PR breast cancer cases.GnRH agonist for protection against ovarian toxicity during chemotherapy for early breast cancer: the Anglo Celtic Group OPTION trial.Chemotherapy-induced premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) impacts fertility and other aspects of women's health. The OPTION trial tested whether administration of a gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist during chemotherapy for early breast cancer reduced the risk of POI.This was a prospective, randomized, parallel group study of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist goserelin administered before and during chemotherapy for breast cancer with stage I-IIIB disease. The primary outcome was amenorrhoea between 12 and 24 months after randomization, supported by elevated follicle stimulating hormone concentrations to give an additional analysis as rate of POI.A total of 227 patients were randomized and the primary analysis was conducted on 202 patients. Goserelin reduced the prevalence of amenorrhoea between 12 and 24 months to 22% versus 38% in the control group (P = 0.015) and the prevalence of POI to 18.5% versus 34.8% in the control group (P = 0.048). Follicle stimulating hormone concentrations were also lower in all women treated with goserelin at both 12 and 24 months (P = 0.027, P = 0.001, respectively). The effect of goserelin was not statistically significant in women >40 years. Assessment of the ovarian reserve using anti-Müllerian hormone showed a marked fall in both groups during treatment to median values of 5% of pretreatment levels in the control group and 7% in the goserelin group, which were not significantly different between groups.This study shows that goserelin reduced the risk of POI in women treated with chemotherapy for early breast cancer, with particular efficacy in women aged ≤40 years old. The degree of ovarian protection also seems limited and the clinical significance for fertility and longer term prevention of estrogen deficiency-related outcomes needs to be determined.Effect of leuprolide acetate on ovarian function after cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-based chemotherapy in premenopausal patients with breast cancer: results from a phase II randomized trial.Previous studies provided inconclusive evidence for the effectiveness of gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue on ovarian function protection against chemotherapy-induced genotoxicity in premenopausal patients. This study was designed to examine the efficacy of leuprolide acetate on ovarian function preservation in patients with breast cancer. A total of 220 patients were recruited in this prospective clinical trial and were assigned randomly to receive cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-based chemotherapy only or chemotherapy plus leuprolide acetate. Resumption of menses or premenopausal levels of both follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and estradiol (E2) within 12 months after the end of chemotherapy were considered as effective ovarian preservation. A total of 183 patients were considered evaluable (94 in chemotherapy-only group and 89 in chemotherapy plus leuprolide acetate group). At the end of follow-up, 27 patients in chemotherapy group and 15 in chemotherapy plus leuprolide acetate group resumed menses; seven patients in chemotherapy group and 14 in chemotherapy plus leuprolide acetate group restored premenopausal levels of FSH and E2. The median time to resume menses was 9.2 months for patients in chemotherapy plus leuprolide acetate group and was not reached in chemotherapy-only group. In addition, our results demonstrated that age and chemotherapy doses made no significant difference in the occurrence of premature menopause. The leuprolide acetate treatment simultaneously with cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-based chemotherapy reduced the risk of developing premature menopause in premenopausal patients with breast cancer.Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Analog Cotreatment for the Preservation of Ovarian Function during Gonadotoxic Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.To determine by meta-analysis whether gonadotropin-releasing hormone analog (GnRHa) cotreatment accompanying chemotherapy for breast cancer protects ovarian function.Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing GnRH cotreatment with chemotherapy alone in premenopausal women were collected by electronic and manual searches of Pubmed, MEDLINE (OVID), CENTRAL (The Coehrane Central Register of Controlled Trials), CBM, CNKI, VIP and Wanfang data bases. All the data was analyzed by Stata 11.2.Seven studies with a total of 677 participants met the inclusion criteria. The outcome of meta-analysis implied that, compared with adjuvant chemotherapy alone, the number of patients with resumption of spontaneous menstruation was statistically greater in the GnRH cotreatment patients (OR 2.83; 95% CI, 1.52-5.25).Evidence from RCTs suggests a potential benefit of GnRH cotreatment with chemotherapy in premenopausal women, producing higher rates of spontaneous resumption of menses.Gonadatrophin suppression to prevent chemotherapy-induced ovarian damage: a randomized controlled trial.To estimate the effectiveness of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analogues cotreatment in preventing chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea in young breast cancer patients undergoing cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy.One hundred hormone-insensitive breast cancer participants (aged 18-40 years) were recruited from two university-affiliated oncology centers in Egypt. Opting for type of cotreatment was based on available timeframe until start of chemotherapy. Fifty women ready for early chemotherapy were randomized to receive either chemotherapy alone (arm I) or chemotherapy after downregulation (estradiol less than 50 pg/mL) by GnRH antagonist and agonist (arm II). Then, GnRH antagonist was discontinued and agonist was continued until the end of chemotherapy. When chemotherapy was to start later than 10 days after study inclusion, 50 women were randomized to receive either chemotherapy alone (arm III) or chemotherapy after downregulation with GnRH agonist (arm IV). Resumption of menstruation at 12 months after end of chemotherapy was the primary outcome. Postchemotherapy hormonal and ultrasound changes were secondary outcomes.Twelve months after termination of chemotherapy, there were no differences in menstruation resumption rates between GnRH-treated patients and control group individuals in either early (80% in arms I and II, risk ratio 1, 95% confidence interval 0.7-.32; P=1.00) or delayed chemotherapy groups (80% and 84% in arms III and IV, risk ratio 0.95, 95% confidence interval 0.73-1.235; P=.71). There were no differences in hormonal and ultrasound markers between GnRH analogue users and control group individuals. The use of GnRH analogue cotreatment did not predict independently the odds of menstruating at 12 months.GnRH analogue cotreatment does not offer a significant protective effect on ovarian function in patients treated by cyclophosphamide-based chemotherapy.Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry. www.anzctr.org.au, ACTRN12609001059257.I.Ovarian Suppression With Triptorelin During Adjuvant Breast Cancer Chemotherapy and Long-term Ovarian Function, Pregnancies, and Disease-Free Survival: A Randomized Clinical Trial.Whether the administration of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogues (LHRHa) during chemotherapy is a reliable strategy to preserve ovarian function is controversial owing to both the lack of data on long-term ovarian function and pregnancies and the safety concerns about the potential negative interactions between endocrine therapy and chemotherapy.To evaluate long-term results of LHRHa-induced ovarian suppression during breast cancer chemotherapy.Parallel, randomized, open-label, phase 3 superiority trial conducted at 16 Italian sites. Between October 2003 and January 2008, 281 premenopausal women with stage I to III hormone receptor-positive or hormone receptor-negative breast cancer were enrolled. Last annual follow-up was June 3, 2014.Patients were randomized to receive adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemotherapy alone (control group) or chemotherapy plus triptorelin (LHRHa group).The primary planned end point was incidence of chemotherapy-induced early menopause. Post hoc end points were long-term ovarian function (evaluated by yearly assessment of menstrual activity and defined as resumed by the occurrence of at least 1 menstrual cycle), pregnancies, and disease-free survival (DFS).A total of 281 women (median age, 39 [range, 24-45] years) were randomized. Median follow-up was 7.3 years (interquartile range, 6.3-8.2 years). The 5-year cumulative incidence estimate of menstrual resumption was 72.6% (95% CI, 65.7%-80.3%) among the 148 patients in the LHRHa group and 64.0% (95% CI, 56.2%-72.8%) among the 133 patients in the control group (hazard ratio [HR], 1.28 [95% CI, 0.98-1.68]; P = .07; age-adjusted HR, 1.48 [95% CI, 1.12-1.95]; P = .006). Eight pregnancies (5-year cumulative incidence estimate of pregnancy, 2.1% [95% CI, 0.7%-6.3%]) occurred in the LHRHa group and 3 (5-year cumulative incidence estimate of pregnancy, 1.6% [95% CI, 0.4%-6.2%]) in the control group (HR, 2.56 [95% CI, 0.68-9.60]; P = .14; age-adjusted HR, 2.40 [95% CI, 0.62-9.22]; P = .20). Five-year DFS was 80.5% (95% CI, 73.1%-86.1%) in the LHRHa group and 83.7% (95% CI, 76.1%-89.1%) in the control group (LHRHa vs control: HR, 1.17 [95% CI, 0.72-1.92]; P = .52).Among premenopausal women with either hormone receptor-positive or hormone receptor-negative breast cancer, concurrent administration of triptorelin and chemotherapy, compared with chemotherapy alone, was associated with higher long-term probability of ovarian function recovery, without a statistically significant difference in pregnancy rate. There was no statistically significant difference in DFS for women assigned to triptorelin and those assigned to chemotherapy alone, although study power was limited.clinicaltrials.gov Identifier:NCT00311636.Effect of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonist on ovarian function after modern adjuvant breast cancer chemotherapy: the GBG 37 ZORO study.Observational studies suggested that luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone agonists (LHRHa) might prevent premature ovarian failure resulting from adjuvant chemotherapy in premenopausal patients. We aimed to test the efficacy of ovarian function preservation with the LHRHa goserelin in patients with breast cancer.In a prospective, randomized, open-label, controlled multicenter study, 60 patients younger than age 46 years with hormone-insensitive breast cancer were allocated to receive anthracycline/cyclophosphamide (with or without taxane) -based neoadjuvant chemotherapy with or without goserelin. The first goserelin injection was administered at least 2 weeks before the first chemotherapy cycle, continuing at 3.6 mg subcutaneously every 4 weeks until the end of the last cycle. The primary objective was the reappearance of normal ovarian function, defined as two consecutive menstrual periods within 21 to 35 days at 6 months after end of chemotherapy.Fifty-three patients (88.3%) experienced temporary amenorrhea (93.3% with v 83.3% without goserelin). No significant difference was observed regarding the reappearance of menstruation at 6 months after chemotherapy (70.0% with v 56.7% without goserelin; difference of 13.3%; 95% CI, -10.85 to 37.45; P = .284). All but one evaluable patient reported regular menses at 2 years after chemotherapy. Time to restoration of menstruation was 6.8 months (95% CI, 5.2 to 8.4) with goserelin and 6.1 months (95% CI, 5.3 to 6.8) without goserelin (P = .304). Chemotherapy resulted in a decreased ovarian reserve measured by inhibin B and anti-Müllerian hormone during follow-up, supporting the other findings.Premenopausal patients with breast cancer receiving goserelin simultaneously with modern neoadjuvant chemotherapy did not experience statistically significantly less amenorrhea 6 months after end of chemotherapy compared with those receiving chemotherapy alone.Ovarian function after cancer treatment in young women affected by Hodgkin disease (HD).We have evaluated the best method to assess the ovarian reserve and the ovarian protective effect of GnRH-analog (GnRH-a), in 29 women with Hodgkin's disease (HD) treated with chemotherapy (CHT). The ovarian reserve was studied by measuring the serum levels of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), inhibin B, antimullerian hormone (AMH) and the ultrasound antral follicular count (AFC). The patients were randomly treated with or without GnRH-a. At the time of study menstrual function was normal in 21 cases (72.4%), but absent in 8 (27.5%). Mean basal values of FSH, LH, AMH, inhibin B and AFC were normal in patients less than 30 years old and in the group treated four years or less before observation. AFC appeared to be the best marker of reduced ovarian reserve and a combination of AFC-AMH or inhibin B appeared the best predictor. In the GnRH-a group, no women had amenorrhoea, although ovarian reserve assessment was not significantly different from those who were not treated. The time-interval from CHT was the only significant predictor of ovarian function in GnRH-a treated patients. In conclusion, ovarian reserve evaluation, in young patients treated by CHT, can be performed by AFC. GnRH-a treatment does not have a protective effect, but could delay the development of ovarian failure.Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists for prevention of chemotherapy-induced ovarian damage: prospective randomized study.To determine whether GnRHa administration before and during combination chemotherapy for breast cancer could preserve posttreatment ovarian function in young women or not.Prospective randomized controlled study.Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mansura University Hospital, Mansura, Egypt.Eighty patients with unilateral adenocarcinoma of the breast and with no metastasis who had undergone modified radical mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery plus full axillary lymph node dissection were included in the study. Patients were assigned randomly to receive combined GnRHa and chemotherapy or chemotherapy alone. One woman in each group dropped out.Return of spontaneous menstruation and ovulation. Hormonal changes (FSH, LH, E(2), P) during and after the course of treatment.In the study group, 89.6% resumed menses and 69.2% resumed spontaneous ovulation within 3-8 months of termination of the GnRHa/chemotherapy cotreatment; 11.4% experienced hypergonadotrophic amenorrhoea and ovarian failure 8 months after treatment. In the control group (chemotherapy without GnRHa), 33.3% resumed menses and 25.6% resumed normal ovarian activity. The median FSH and LH concentrations, 6 months after completion of the GnRHa/chemotherapy cotreatment group, were significantly less than the control group. During the GnRHa/chemotherapy cotreatment the concentrations of FSH, LH, and P decreased to almost prepubertal levels. However, within 1-3 months after the last GnRHa injection, an increase in LH and FSH concentrations was detected, followed several weeks later in by an increase in P concentrations to within normal levels.GnRHa administration before and during combination chemotherapy for breast cancer may preserve posttreatment ovarian function in women <40 years. Long-term studies are required.No Evidence for the Benefit of Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Agonist in Preserving Ovarian Function and Fertility in Lymphoma Survivors Treated With Chemotherapy: Final Long-Term Report of a Prospective Randomized Trial.We have reported previously that after 1-year follow up, gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRHa) did not prevent chemotherapy-induced premature ovarian failure (POF) in patients with lymphoma, but may provide protection of the ovarian reserve. Here, we report the final analysis of the cohort after 5 years of follow up.A total of 129 patients with lymphoma were randomly assigned to receive either triptorelin plus norethisterone (GnRHa group) or norethisterone alone (control group) during chemotherapy. Ovarian function and fertility were reported after 2, 3, 4, and 5 to 7 years of follow up. The primary end point was POF, defined as at least one follicle-stimulating hormone value of > 40 IU/L after 2 years of follow up.Sixty-seven patients 26.21 ± 0.64 years of age had available data after a median follow-up time of 5.33 years in the GnRHa group and 5.58 years in the control group (P = .452). Multivariate logistic regression analysis showed a significantly increased risk of POF in patients according to age (P = .047), the conditioning regimen for hematopoietic stem cell transplant (P = .002), and the cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide > 5 g/m(2) (P = .019), but not to the coadministration of GnRHa during chemotherapy (odds ratio, 0.702; P = .651). The ovarian reserve, evaluated using anti-Müllerian hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone levels, was similar in both groups. Fifty-three percent and 43% achieved pregnancy in the GnRHa and control groups, respectively (P = .467).To the best of our knowledge, this is the first long-term analysis confirming that GnRHa is not efficient in preventing chemotherapy-induced POF in young patients with lymphoma and did not influence future pregnancy rate. These results reopen the debate about the drug's benefit in that it should not be recommended as standard for fertility preservation in patients with lymphoma.Concurrent and sequential initiation of ovarian function suppression with chemotherapy in premenopausal women with endocrine-responsive early breast cancer: an exploratory analysis of TEXT and SOFT.Recent breast cancer treatment guidelines recommend that higher-risk premenopausal patients should receive ovarian function suppression (OFS) as part of adjuvant endocrine therapy. If chemotherapy is also given, it is uncertain whether to select concurrent or sequential OFS initiation.We analyzed 1872 patients enrolled in the randomized phase III TEXT and SOFT trials who received adjuvant chemotherapy for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer and upon randomization to an OFS-containing adjuvant endocrine therapy, initiated gonadotropin-releasing-hormone-agonist triptorelin. Breast cancer-free interval (BCFI) was compared between patients who received OFS concurrently with chemotherapy in TEXT (n = 1242) versus sequentially post-chemotherapy in SOFT (n = 630). Because timing of trial enrollment relative to adjuvant chemotherapy differed, we implemented landmark analysis re-defining BCFI beginning 1 year after final dose of chemotherapy (median, 15.5 and 8.1 months from enrollment to landmark in TEXT and SOFT, respectively). As a non-randomized treatment comparison, we implemented comparative-effectiveness propensity score methodology with weighted Cox modeling.Distributions of several clinico-pathologic characteristics differed between groups. Patients who were premenopausal post-chemotherapy in SOFT were younger on average. The median duration of adjuvant chemotherapy was 18 weeks in both groups. There were 231 (12%) BC events after post-landmark median follow-up of about 5 years. Concurrent use of triptorelin with chemotherapy was not associated with a significant difference in post-landmark BCFI compared with sequential triptorelin post-chemotherapy, either in the overall population (HR = 1.11, 95% CI 0.72-1.72; P = 0.72; 4-year BCFI 89% in both groups), or in the subgroup of 692 women <40 years at diagnosis (HR = 1.13, 95% CI 0.69-1.84) who are less likely to develop chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea.Based on comparative-effectiveness modeling of TEXT and SOFT after about 5 years median follow-up, with limited statistical power especially for the subgroup <40 years, neither detrimental nor beneficial effect of concurrent administration of OFS with chemotherapy on the efficacy of adjuvant therapy that includes chemotherapy was detected.NCT00066690 and NCT00066703.Goserelin for ovarian protection during breast-cancer adjuvant chemotherapy.Ovarian failure is a common toxic effect of chemotherapy. Studies of the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists to protect ovarian function have shown mixed results and lack data on pregnancy outcomes.We randomly assigned 257 premenopausal women with operable hormone-receptor-negative breast cancer to receive standard chemotherapy with the GnRH agonist goserelin (goserelin group) or standard chemotherapy without goserelin (chemotherapy-alone group). The primary study end point was the rate of ovarian failure at 2 years, with ovarian failure defined as the absence of menses in the preceding 6 months and levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in the postmenopausal range. Rates were compared with the use of conditional logistic regression. Secondary end points included pregnancy outcomes and disease-free and overall survival.At baseline, 218 patients were eligible and could be evaluated. Among 135 with complete primary end-point data, the ovarian failure rate was 8% in the goserelin group and 22% in the chemotherapy-alone group (odds ratio, 0.30; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.09 to 0.97; two-sided P=0.04). Owing to missing primary end-point data, sensitivity analyses were performed, and the results were consistent with the main findings. Missing data did not differ according to treatment group or according to the stratification factors of age and planned chemotherapy regimen. Among the 218 patients who could be evaluated, pregnancy occurred in more women in the goserelin group than in the chemotherapy-alone group (21% vs. 11%, P=0.03); women in the goserelin group also had improved disease-free survival (P=0.04) and overall survival (P=0.05).Although missing data weaken interpretation of the findings, administration of goserelin with chemotherapy appeared to protect against ovarian failure, reducing the risk of early menopause and improving prospects for fertility. (Funded by the National Cancer Institute and others; POEMS/S0230 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00068601.).Randomized trial using gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist triptorelin for the preservation of ovarian function during (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer.Chemotherapy-induced amenorrhea is a serious concern for women undergoing cancer therapy. This prospective randomized trial evaluated the use of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) analog triptorelin to preserve ovarian function in women treated with chemotherapy for early-stage breast cancer.Premenopausal women age 44 years or younger were randomly assigned to receive either triptorelin or no triptorelin during (neo)adjuvant chemotherapy and were further stratified by age (< 35, 35 to 39, > 39 years), estrogen receptor status, and chemotherapy regimen. Objectives included the resumption of menses and serial monitoring of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and inhibin A and B levels.Targeted for 124 patients with a planned 5-year follow-up, the trial was stopped for futility after 49 patients were enrolled (median age, 39 years; range, 21 to 43 years); 47 patients were treated according to assigned groups with four cycles of adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide alone or followed by four cycles of paclitaxel or six cycles of fluorouracil, epirubicin, and cyclophosphamide. Menstruation resumed in 19 (90%) of 21 patients in the control group and in 23 (88%) of 26 in the triptorelin group (P= .36). Menses returned after a median of 5.8 months (range, 1 to 19 months) after completion of chemotherapy in the triptorelin versus 5.0 months (range, 0 to 28 months) in the control arm (P= .58). Two patients (age 26 and 35 years at random assignment) in the control group had spontaneous pregnancies with term deliveries. FSH and inhibin B levels correlated with menstrual status.When stratified for age, estrogen receptor status, and treatment regimen, amenorrhea rates on triptorelin were comparable to those seen in the control group.