Spinal tumors in coexisting degenerative spine disease--a differential diagnostic problem.The clinical presentation of spinal tumors is known to vary, in many instances causing a delay in diagnosis and treatment, especially with benign tumors. Neck or back pain and sciatica, with or without neurological deficits, are mostly caused by degenerative spine and disc disease. Spinal tumors are rare, and the possibility of concurrent signs of degenerative changes in the spine is high. We report a series of ten patients who were unsuccessfully treated for degenerative spine disease. They were subsequently referred for operative treatment to our department, where an initial diagnosis of a tumor was made. Two patients had already been operated on for disc herniations, but without long-lasting effects. In eight patients the diagnosis of a tumor was made preoperatively. In two cases the tumor was found intraoperatively. All patients showed radiological signs of coexisting degenerative spine disease, making diagnosis difficult. MRI was the most helpful tool for diagnosing the tumors. A frequent symptom was back pain in the recumbent position. Other typical settings that should raise suspicion are persistent pain after disc surgery and neurological signs inconsistent with the level of noted degenerative disease. Tumor extirpation was successful in treating the main complaints in all but one patient. There was an incidence of 0.5% of patients in which a spinal tumor was responsible for symptoms thought to be of degenerative origin. However, this corresponds to 28.6% of all spine-tumor patients in this series. MRI should be widely used to exclude a tumor above the level of degenerative pathology.The benefit of SPECT when added to planar scintigraphy in patients with bone metastases in the spine.This study compared the efficiency of SPECT with planar bone scans in differentiating malignant from benign lesions and in detecting metastases to the spine.Planar scintigraphy and SPECT were performed in 37 patients with low back pain without known malignancy and in 38 patients with confirmed malignancy. The type, location, and intensity of tracer accumulation were compared on the planar and SPECT scans. The malignant or benign nature of lesions was proved by radiologic methods, histologic findings, 6 month follow-up, or all of these.More metastases were detected by SPECT (SPECT, 58 of 64; planar, 42 of 64; P < 0.01). In three of seven patients with known malignancy who had a normal result of planar scan, only SPECT detected metastases. Fifty-nine metastases were radiologically mainly osteolytic, one was osteoblastic and four were mixed. Most lesions showed increased radioactivity (40 of 42 on planar scans vs. 45 of 58 on SPECT) and 2 of 42 (5%) vs. 12 of 58 (21%) were cold with marginally increased uptake. One of 58 metastases was a cold lesion seen on SPECT only. Lesions were more often malignant than benign when seen on SPECT in a pedicle (n = 5; malignant = 3, benign = 2), in the body and pedicle (n = 22; malignant = 14, benign = 8), within the vertebral body (n = 5; malignant = 4, benign = 1) and in the whole vertebra (n = 6; malignant = 4, benign = 2). The lesion to background ratio was higher on SPECT than on planar scans (SPECT, 2.26; planar scans, 1.86; P < 0.05 in malignant lesions).SPECT of the spine improved the diagnostic accuracy of bone scans when added to a planar scan in patients with known malignancy and clinical suspicion of spinal metastases when the planar scan was borderline abnormal. It helps in differentiating between benign and malignant lesions of the spine.Spinal tumors in coexisting degenerative spine disease--a differential diagnostic problem.The clinical presentation of spinal tumors is known to vary, in many instances causing a delay in diagnosis and treatment, especially with benign tumors. Neck or back pain and sciatica, with or without neurological deficits, are mostly caused by degenerative spine and disc disease. Spinal tumors are rare, and the possibility of concurrent signs of degenerative changes in the spine is high. We report a series of ten patients who were unsuccessfully treated for degenerative spine disease. They were subsequently referred for operative treatment to our department, where an initial diagnosis of a tumor was made. Two patients had already been operated on for disc herniations, but without long-lasting effects. In eight patients the diagnosis of a tumor was made preoperatively. In two cases the tumor was found intraoperatively. All patients showed radiological signs of coexisting degenerative spine disease, making diagnosis difficult. MRI was the most helpful tool for diagnosing the tumors. A frequent symptom was back pain in the recumbent position. Other typical settings that should raise suspicion are persistent pain after disc surgery and neurological signs inconsistent with the level of noted degenerative disease. Tumor extirpation was successful in treating the main complaints in all but one patient. There was an incidence of 0.5% of patients in which a spinal tumor was responsible for symptoms thought to be of degenerative origin. However, this corresponds to 28.6% of all spine-tumor patients in this series. MRI should be widely used to exclude a tumor above the level of degenerative pathology.The diagnostic contribution of the frontal lumbar spine radiograph in community referred low back pain--a prospective study of 1030 patients.The diagnostic contribution of the anteroposterior (AP) view was studied to assess whether this view could be omitted safely, thus reducing the radiation burden received by patients undergoing lumbar spine radiography.Prospective analysis of 1030 consecutive referrals for lumbar spine radiography from general practice.In the majority of cases (90.5%) the AP view was non-contributory. In 4.2% the diagnosis was strengthened and it was altered in 4.6%. However, in the latter group only 1.3% of the total were considered significant alterations. These were cases of possible, but not definite, pars defects and sacroiliitis. Specific important conditions such as infection, malignancy and benign tumours were not missed on the lateral view alone, in our study population. The radiation burden is reduced by 75% by omitting the AP view.A single lateral view is an adequate examination, with the proviso that sacroiliac joint disease is not assessed on this view and some pars defects and facet joint degenerative changes may be overlooked. The radiation protection gains are considerable. A single lateral lumbar view is now our routine practice unless sacroiliitis is a specific clinical concern.The benefit of SPECT when added to planar scintigraphy in patients with bone metastases in the spine.This study compared the efficiency of SPECT with planar bone scans in differentiating malignant from benign lesions and in detecting metastases to the spine.Planar scintigraphy and SPECT were performed in 37 patients with low back pain without known malignancy and in 38 patients with confirmed malignancy. The type, location, and intensity of tracer accumulation were compared on the planar and SPECT scans. The malignant or benign nature of lesions was proved by radiologic methods, histologic findings, 6 month follow-up, or all of these.More metastases were detected by SPECT (SPECT, 58 of 64; planar, 42 of 64; P < 0.01). In three of seven patients with known malignancy who had a normal result of planar scan, only SPECT detected metastases. Fifty-nine metastases were radiologically mainly osteolytic, one was osteoblastic and four were mixed. Most lesions showed increased radioactivity (40 of 42 on planar scans vs. 45 of 58 on SPECT) and 2 of 42 (5%) vs. 12 of 58 (21%) were cold with marginally increased uptake. One of 58 metastases was a cold lesion seen on SPECT only. Lesions were more often malignant than benign when seen on SPECT in a pedicle (n = 5; malignant = 3, benign = 2), in the body and pedicle (n = 22; malignant = 14, benign = 8), within the vertebral body (n = 5; malignant = 4, benign = 1) and in the whole vertebra (n = 6; malignant = 4, benign = 2). The lesion to background ratio was higher on SPECT than on planar scans (SPECT, 2.26; planar scans, 1.86; P < 0.05 in malignant lesions).SPECT of the spine improved the diagnostic accuracy of bone scans when added to a planar scan in patients with known malignancy and clinical suspicion of spinal metastases when the planar scan was borderline abnormal. It helps in differentiating between benign and malignant lesions of the spine.Use of lumbosacral spine radiographs in a level II emergency department.We studied indications for lumbosacral spine radiographs in an emergency department setting.Clinicians completed a lumbosacral spine request form before obtaining lumbosacral radiographs on 482 patients who were examined in a level II emergency department. The clinicians detailed the indications for the examination, their suspected clinical diagnoses, and the expected effect of the lumbosacral spine study on management. In addition, the duration of the patients' symptoms was recorded as well as their age and sex. These data were compared with the actual radiographic findings as interpreted by board-certified musculoskeletal radiologists.Major indications for lumbosacral radiographs were lower back pain (92%) and trauma (36%). Patient expectation and medicolegal concerns, related either to insurance documentation or to physician litigation, were cited in 42% of cases. A neurologic deficit was present in 88% of patients, and a history of neoplasm was elicited in 4%. Strain (56%) and fracture (20%) were the most commonly suspected clinical diagnoses. Radiographs showed either normal findings or spondylosis in 86% of cases. Fractures, of which 10 were definitely acute, were identified in 55 patients. No fracture required decompression. Neoplastic involvement was found in seven patients, all of whom had histories of osseous metastases. Neurologic deficit, present in 37 patients, did not correlate with abnormalities seen on lumbosacral radiographs.As with studies of lumbosacral spine radiographs obtained in outpatient settings, our data from a level II emergency department support the use of lumbosacral spine radiographs for patients with a history of trauma, even if relatively minor, in elderly patients and in patients with lower back pain who have a history of neoplasm. Lumbosacral radiographs obtained for an isolated complaint of lower back pain generally provide no clinically useful information. Similarly, lumbosacral radiographs obtained for patients with isolated neurologic abnormalities are unrevealing. Such patients are better examined (although not necessarily at the time of emergency department evaluation) with techniques such as MR imaging that show soft-tissue lesions.Selective criteria may increase lumbosacral spine roentgenogram use in acute low-back pain.Eleven clinical criteria have been proposed to limit use of lumbosacral spine roentgenograms in patients with acute low-back pain who are at risk for vertebral cancer, osteomyelitis, acute fracture, or herniated disk. We retrospectively applied the criteria to 471 patients with acute low-back pain in three teaching hospital walk-in clinics. Roentgenograms were obtained at the initial visit in 99 patients (21.1%); the number would have increased to 217 (46.1%) if the criteria had been used. The following four patient characteristics were associated with actual roentgenogram use: older age, longer duration of symptoms, reflex asymmetry, and point vertebral tenderness. Adoption of the 11 criteria studied herein may inadvertently increase roentgenogram use, thereby raising health care costs and exposing more patients to gonadal irradiation. The standard of practice in these three clinics seemed to entail use of less broad roentgenogram selection criteria. Other published guidelines for roentgenograms emphasize clinical follow-up, reserving further evaluation for patients who fail to improve after a trial of bed rest and analgesics.Spinal tumors in coexisting degenerative spine disease--a differential diagnostic problem.The clinical presentation of spinal tumors is known to vary, in many instances causing a delay in diagnosis and treatment, especially with benign tumors. Neck or back pain and sciatica, with or without neurological deficits, are mostly caused by degenerative spine and disc disease. Spinal tumors are rare, and the possibility of concurrent signs of degenerative changes in the spine is high. We report a series of ten patients who were unsuccessfully treated for degenerative spine disease. They were subsequently referred for operative treatment to our department, where an initial diagnosis of a tumor was made. Two patients had already been operated on for disc herniations, but without long-lasting effects. In eight patients the diagnosis of a tumor was made preoperatively. In two cases the tumor was found intraoperatively. All patients showed radiological signs of coexisting degenerative spine disease, making diagnosis difficult. MRI was the most helpful tool for diagnosing the tumors. A frequent symptom was back pain in the recumbent position. Other typical settings that should raise suspicion are persistent pain after disc surgery and neurological signs inconsistent with the level of noted degenerative disease. Tumor extirpation was successful in treating the main complaints in all but one patient. There was an incidence of 0.5% of patients in which a spinal tumor was responsible for symptoms thought to be of degenerative origin. However, this corresponds to 28.6% of all spine-tumor patients in this series. MRI should be widely used to exclude a tumor above the level of degenerative pathology.The diagnostic contribution of the frontal lumbar spine radiograph in community referred low back pain--a prospective study of 1030 patients.The diagnostic contribution of the anteroposterior (AP) view was studied to assess whether this view could be omitted safely, thus reducing the radiation burden received by patients undergoing lumbar spine radiography.Prospective analysis of 1030 consecutive referrals for lumbar spine radiography from general practice.In the majority of cases (90.5%) the AP view was non-contributory. In 4.2% the diagnosis was strengthened and it was altered in 4.6%. However, in the latter group only 1.3% of the total were considered significant alterations. These were cases of possible, but not definite, pars defects and sacroiliitis. Specific important conditions such as infection, malignancy and benign tumours were not missed on the lateral view alone, in our study population. The radiation burden is reduced by 75% by omitting the AP view.A single lateral view is an adequate examination, with the proviso that sacroiliac joint disease is not assessed on this view and some pars defects and facet joint degenerative changes may be overlooked. The radiation protection gains are considerable. A single lateral lumbar view is now our routine practice unless sacroiliitis is a specific clinical concern.The benefit of SPECT when added to planar scintigraphy in patients with bone metastases in the spine.This study compared the efficiency of SPECT with planar bone scans in differentiating malignant from benign lesions and in detecting metastases to the spine.Planar scintigraphy and SPECT were performed in 37 patients with low back pain without known malignancy and in 38 patients with confirmed malignancy. The type, location, and intensity of tracer accumulation were compared on the planar and SPECT scans. The malignant or benign nature of lesions was proved by radiologic methods, histologic findings, 6 month follow-up, or all of these.More metastases were detected by SPECT (SPECT, 58 of 64; planar, 42 of 64; P < 0.01). In three of seven patients with known malignancy who had a normal result of planar scan, only SPECT detected metastases. Fifty-nine metastases were radiologically mainly osteolytic, one was osteoblastic and four were mixed. Most lesions showed increased radioactivity (40 of 42 on planar scans vs. 45 of 58 on SPECT) and 2 of 42 (5%) vs. 12 of 58 (21%) were cold with marginally increased uptake. One of 58 metastases was a cold lesion seen on SPECT only. Lesions were more often malignant than benign when seen on SPECT in a pedicle (n = 5; malignant = 3, benign = 2), in the body and pedicle (n = 22; malignant = 14, benign = 8), within the vertebral body (n = 5; malignant = 4, benign = 1) and in the whole vertebra (n = 6; malignant = 4, benign = 2). The lesion to background ratio was higher on SPECT than on planar scans (SPECT, 2.26; planar scans, 1.86; P < 0.05 in malignant lesions).SPECT of the spine improved the diagnostic accuracy of bone scans when added to a planar scan in patients with known malignancy and clinical suspicion of spinal metastases when the planar scan was borderline abnormal. It helps in differentiating between benign and malignant lesions of the spine.Use of lumbosacral spine radiographs in a level II emergency department.We studied indications for lumbosacral spine radiographs in an emergency department setting.Clinicians completed a lumbosacral spine request form before obtaining lumbosacral radiographs on 482 patients who were examined in a level II emergency department. The clinicians detailed the indications for the examination, their suspected clinical diagnoses, and the expected effect of the lumbosacral spine study on management. In addition, the duration of the patients' symptoms was recorded as well as their age and sex. These data were compared with the actual radiographic findings as interpreted by board-certified musculoskeletal radiologists.Major indications for lumbosacral radiographs were lower back pain (92%) and trauma (36%). Patient expectation and medicolegal concerns, related either to insurance documentation or to physician litigation, were cited in 42% of cases. A neurologic deficit was present in 88% of patients, and a history of neoplasm was elicited in 4%. Strain (56%) and fracture (20%) were the most commonly suspected clinical diagnoses. Radiographs showed either normal findings or spondylosis in 86% of cases. Fractures, of which 10 were definitely acute, were identified in 55 patients. No fracture required decompression. Neoplastic involvement was found in seven patients, all of whom had histories of osseous metastases. Neurologic deficit, present in 37 patients, did not correlate with abnormalities seen on lumbosacral radiographs.As with studies of lumbosacral spine radiographs obtained in outpatient settings, our data from a level II emergency department support the use of lumbosacral spine radiographs for patients with a history of trauma, even if relatively minor, in elderly patients and in patients with lower back pain who have a history of neoplasm. Lumbosacral radiographs obtained for an isolated complaint of lower back pain generally provide no clinically useful information. Similarly, lumbosacral radiographs obtained for patients with isolated neurologic abnormalities are unrevealing. Such patients are better examined (although not necessarily at the time of emergency department evaluation) with techniques such as MR imaging that show soft-tissue lesions.Selective criteria may increase lumbosacral spine roentgenogram use in acute low-back pain.Eleven clinical criteria have been proposed to limit use of lumbosacral spine roentgenograms in patients with acute low-back pain who are at risk for vertebral cancer, osteomyelitis, acute fracture, or herniated disk. We retrospectively applied the criteria to 471 patients with acute low-back pain in three teaching hospital walk-in clinics. Roentgenograms were obtained at the initial visit in 99 patients (21.1%); the number would have increased to 217 (46.1%) if the criteria had been used. The following four patient characteristics were associated with actual roentgenogram use: older age, longer duration of symptoms, reflex asymmetry, and point vertebral tenderness. Adoption of the 11 criteria studied herein may inadvertently increase roentgenogram use, thereby raising health care costs and exposing more patients to gonadal irradiation. The standard of practice in these three clinics seemed to entail use of less broad roentgenogram selection criteria. Other published guidelines for roentgenograms emphasize clinical follow-up, reserving further evaluation for patients who fail to improve after a trial of bed rest and analgesics.