Esophageal capsule endoscopy in patients with suspected esophageal disease: double blinded comparison with esophagogastroduodenoscopy and assessment of interobserver variability.The study aim was to compare the diagnostic yield of capsule endoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in patients with suspected esophageal disease. Secondary aims were to assess interobserver variability of capsule endoscopy readings and safety.In total, 98 patients (53 men, 53 +/- 13 years) with an indication for EGD were included. The patient population was artificially enriched to include two thirds of patients with abnormal esophageal findings at EGD, which was followed by capsule endoscopy. Capsule recordings were blindly read by three endoscopists, one from the center that recruited the patient and two from the other center. Study outcomes were the findings described on EGD and capsule endoscopy, agreement between EGD and capsule endoscopy for findings, quality of the capsule recording, and interobserver agreement for capsule endoscopy quality and findings.EGD was normal in 34 patients and showed esophageal findings in 62 (esophagitis 28, hiatus hernia 21, varices 21, Barrett's esophagus 11, others 7). Average esophageal transit time of the capsule was 361 +/- 393 seconds. Capsule endoscopy was normal in 36 patients but detected esophagitis in 23, hiatus hernia in 0, varices in 23, Barrett's esophagus in 18, and others in 4. The positive predictive value of capsule endoscopy was 80.0 % and the negative predictive value was 61.1 %. Overall agreement per patient was moderate between EGD and capsule endoscopy for the per-patient (kappa = 0.42) and per-findings (kappa = 0.40) analyses. Interobserver agreement between capsule endoscopy readings was moderate for findings (kappa = 0.39) and quality assessment (kappa = 0.24). No adverse event was observed after either EGD or capsule endoscopy.In this study, despite artificial prevalence enrichment, capsule endoscopy showed a moderate sensitivity and specificity in the detection of esophageal diseases.Small-bowel lesions caused by portal hypertension of schistosomal origin: a capsule endoscopy pilot study.Schistosomiasis is a highly prevalent disease. It can evolve to its hepatosplenic form in up to 10% of the cases. The small-bowel lesions developed during the hepatosplenic stage of the disease have not been described in vivo.The aim of this study was to describe, for the first time, in a pilot study, the endoscopic aspects of the lesions in the small bowel of patients with portal hypertension due to schistosomiasis, using the PillCam SB, and to determine the usefulness of the method for the diagnosis of esophageal varices.Case series.Tertiary-care medical center.Nine nonrandomized patients with hepatosplenic schistosomiasis and esophageal varices without previous GI bleeding were selected based on findings from the PillCam SB. Patients using medications that could alter the coagulation, with history of abdominal surgery, who were undergoing treatment of the portal hypertension other than beta-blocker, and with symptoms suggesting bowel obstruction were excluded. The findings were interpreted by a single endoscopist.Capsule endoscopy was able to diagnose esophageal varices in all 9 patients. All of the patients presented angioectasias and venectasias in the small bowel. Small-bowel varices were present in 22.2% of the patients; edema and erosions were found in 66.7% and 88.9%, respectively. Lesions of so-called "scarred mucosa" were found in 55.5% of the patients.Small number of patients; case series.The PillCam SB was effective, giving a significant contribution to the description of the esophageal varices and small-bowel lesions of the patients with portal hypertension caused by Schistosoma mansoni.Influence of operator experience and reporting time on the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy screening for varices.Conflicting data exist concerning the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) for the screening of varices. No study has examined the influence of operator factors on the accuracy of ECE reporting. The primary aims of this study were, therefore, to examine how operator experience with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and operator reporting times of capsule videos influenced test accuracy. Twelve cirrhotic patients presenting for EGD had same-day ECE performed. The gold standard for variceal grade was determined using a panel of experienced endoscopists. Six novice capsule endoscopists, blinded to results of EGD, subsequently reported capsule videos for each of the 12 patients.Novice capsule endoscopists accurately identified high-risk varices. The mean area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators was 0.88 ±/-0.14. The mean sensitivity, specificity, positive, and negative predictive values for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators were 83%, 93%, 82%, and 97%, respectively. Years of prior EGD experience were not associated with accuracy of capsule reporting (OR = 0.9, 95% CI [0.74, 1.08]; p = .26). Time spent reporting capsule videos was associated with accuracy of capsule reporting for high-risk varices using British Society of Gastroenterology criteria (OR = 1.33, 95% CI [1.05, 1.08]; p = .018). Novice capsule endoscopists are able to accurately identify high-risk esophageal varices. Time taken to report capsule videos, but not amount of prior EGD experience, influenced capsule report accuracy. These findings may have implications for the design of further trials and the cost-effectiveness of ECE screening of varices.Study comparing oesophageal capsule endoscopy versus EGD in the detection of varices.Endoscopic screening and surveillance of cirrhotic patients for oesophageal varices is advocated before initiation of prophylactic therapy for prevention of the first variceal haemorrhage.To compare the diagnostic yield of oesophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) with Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for detecting and grading oesophageal varices and to determine patient tolerance for each procedure.Twenty consecutive cirrhotic patients scheduled for EGD were enrolled in the study.Patients underwent ECE followed by EGD. Patients completed a visual analogue scale after each procedure, assessing level of anxiety, pain, overall satisfaction, and willingness to repeat each procedure.On EGD, 19/20 patients had oesophageal varices. ECE detected varices in 13/19 (68% sensitivity). ECE identified nine out of ten varices rated grade II or higher on EGD. The post-study analogue scale showed a greater level of anxiety before EGD (avg. 2.75/10) versus ECE (avg. 1.5/10).ECE may be used in the assessment of EV. It appears to have more discordance with EGD when evaluating smaller varices. The minimal discomfort, lack of sedation, and decreased risk make ECE a possible substitute to EGD in patients unable or unwilling to undergo EGD.Esophageal capsule endoscopy in patients with suspected esophageal disease: double blinded comparison with esophagogastroduodenoscopy and assessment of interobserver variability.The study aim was to compare the diagnostic yield of capsule endoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in patients with suspected esophageal disease. Secondary aims were to assess interobserver variability of capsule endoscopy readings and safety.In total, 98 patients (53 men, 53 +/- 13 years) with an indication for EGD were included. The patient population was artificially enriched to include two thirds of patients with abnormal esophageal findings at EGD, which was followed by capsule endoscopy. Capsule recordings were blindly read by three endoscopists, one from the center that recruited the patient and two from the other center. Study outcomes were the findings described on EGD and capsule endoscopy, agreement between EGD and capsule endoscopy for findings, quality of the capsule recording, and interobserver agreement for capsule endoscopy quality and findings.EGD was normal in 34 patients and showed esophageal findings in 62 (esophagitis 28, hiatus hernia 21, varices 21, Barrett's esophagus 11, others 7). Average esophageal transit time of the capsule was 361 +/- 393 seconds. Capsule endoscopy was normal in 36 patients but detected esophagitis in 23, hiatus hernia in 0, varices in 23, Barrett's esophagus in 18, and others in 4. The positive predictive value of capsule endoscopy was 80.0 % and the negative predictive value was 61.1 %. Overall agreement per patient was moderate between EGD and capsule endoscopy for the per-patient (kappa = 0.42) and per-findings (kappa = 0.40) analyses. Interobserver agreement between capsule endoscopy readings was moderate for findings (kappa = 0.39) and quality assessment (kappa = 0.24). No adverse event was observed after either EGD or capsule endoscopy.In this study, despite artificial prevalence enrichment, capsule endoscopy showed a moderate sensitivity and specificity in the detection of esophageal diseases.Esophageal capsule endoscopy vs. EGD for the evaluation of portal hypertension: a French prospective multicenter comparative study.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the standard method for the diagnosis of esophago-gastric varices. The aim of this prospective multicenter study was to evaluate the PillCam esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) for this indication.Patients presenting with cirrhotic or noncirrhotic portal hypertension underwent ECEfollowed by EGD at the time of diagnosis. Capsule recordings were blindly read by two endoscopists.A total of 120 patients (72 males, mean age: 58 years; mean Child-Pugh score: 7.2) were included. Esophageal varices were detected in 74 patients. No adverse event was observed after either EGD or ECE. Seven (6%) patients were unable to swallow the capsule. The mean recording time was 204 s (range 1-876). Sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value, and positive predictive value of ECE for the detection of esophageal varices were 77%, 86%, 69%, and 90%, respectively. Sensitivity, specificity, negative and positive predictive values of ECE for the indication of primary prophylaxis (esophageal varices > or = grade 2 and/or red signs) were 77, 88, 90, and 75%, respectively, and 85% of the patients were adequately classified for the indication (or not) of prophylaxis. Interobserver concordance for ECE readings was 79.4% for the diagnosis of varices, 66.4% for the grading of varices, and 89.7% for the indication of prophylaxis.This large multicenter study confirms the safety and acceptable accuracy of ECE for the evaluation of esophageal varices. ECE might be proposed as an alternative to EGD for the screening of portal hypertension, especially in patients unable or unwilling to undergo EGD.Defining the threshold: new data on the ability of capsule endoscopy to discriminate the size of esophageal varices.Endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy, EGD) to screen for esophageal varices (EV) is recommended in patients with portal hypertension. Reports indicate that capsule endoscopy (CE) is capable of identifying large/medium varices (L/MV) when the varix comprises more than 25% of the circumference of the field of view.We evaluated the ability of CE to discriminate the size of EV using this grading scale.Patients underwent CE and EGD on the same day. A blinded investigator interpreted capsule findings. CE labeled EV as L/MV if ≥25% of the lumen circumference was occupied, and small/none for <25%.A total of 37 patients were enrolled in this prospective, observational study at a single tertiary-care academic center. Three CE were excluded due to rapid esophageal transit time or technical malfunction. Using a 25% threshold, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for EC to discriminate L/MV were 23.5%, 88.2%, 66.7%, and 53.6%, respectively (κ=0.12). Reducing the threshold to 12.5% resulted in sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of 88.2%, 64.7%, 71.4%, and 84.6%, respectively (κ=0.53). A receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve showed a 15% threshold to be optimal in discriminating EV size using CE, resulting in sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of 76.5%, 82.4%, 81.3%, and 77.8%, respectively (κ=0.59).This study indicates that discriminating EV size by the current capsule scale is unreliable. Lowering the grading threshold improved the ability to discriminate EV size by CE. In the proper context, CE is an alternative to EGD to screen for EV.Capsule endoscopy is not as accurate as esophagogastroduodenoscopy in screening cirrhotic patients for varices.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the standard technique for screening cirrhotic patients for high-risk varices and other significant upper gastrointestinal lesions (HRVLs). We investigated whether esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) is as convenient and accurate as EGD for the detection of HRVLs.We analyzed data from 65 cirrhotic patients without prior upper gastrointestinal bleeding who were examined for varices and HRVLs by ECE and EGD (both procedures were performed on the same day). EGD was performed by 2 physicians (75% of patients were unsedated) who used standard grading for esophageal and gastric varices, portal hypertensive gastropathy, and HRVLs. Coded capsule tracings were read by 2 investigators, blinded to the EGD findings, using standard grading.The median procedure time for EGD (with or without biopsy collection) was 3 minutes, compared with 20 minutes for ECE. The overall accuracy for diagnosis of esophageal varices was 63.2% ± 5.9%; for detection of esophageal varices red marks was 68.8% ± 5.4%; and for diagnosis of other HRVLs was 51.5% ± 4.2%. The interobserver agreement in the diagnosis of esophageal varices was 90.8%; in the detection of esophageal varices red marks was 86.2%; and in the diagnosis of other HRVLs was 7.3%.ECE is not as accurate as EGD in the diagnosis of esophageal varices and red markings or in grading esophageal varices. Moreover, ECE had poor accuracy in grading portal hypertensive gastropathy and detecting ulcers, gastric varices, and other significant upper gastrointestinal lesions. It took significantly longer to perform ECE and interpret the results than for EGD. These findings do not support ECE as a preferred tool for screening esophageal varices and HRVLs.Small-bowel lesions caused by portal hypertension of schistosomal origin: a capsule endoscopy pilot study.Schistosomiasis is a highly prevalent disease. It can evolve to its hepatosplenic form in up to 10% of the cases. The small-bowel lesions developed during the hepatosplenic stage of the disease have not been described in vivo.The aim of this study was to describe, for the first time, in a pilot study, the endoscopic aspects of the lesions in the small bowel of patients with portal hypertension due to schistosomiasis, using the PillCam SB, and to determine the usefulness of the method for the diagnosis of esophageal varices.Case series.Tertiary-care medical center.Nine nonrandomized patients with hepatosplenic schistosomiasis and esophageal varices without previous GI bleeding were selected based on findings from the PillCam SB. Patients using medications that could alter the coagulation, with history of abdominal surgery, who were undergoing treatment of the portal hypertension other than beta-blocker, and with symptoms suggesting bowel obstruction were excluded. The findings were interpreted by a single endoscopist.Capsule endoscopy was able to diagnose esophageal varices in all 9 patients. All of the patients presented angioectasias and venectasias in the small bowel. Small-bowel varices were present in 22.2% of the patients; edema and erosions were found in 66.7% and 88.9%, respectively. Lesions of so-called "scarred mucosa" were found in 55.5% of the patients.Small number of patients; case series.The PillCam SB was effective, giving a significant contribution to the description of the esophageal varices and small-bowel lesions of the patients with portal hypertension caused by Schistosoma mansoni.The accuracy of PillCam ESO capsule endoscopy versus conventional upper endoscopy for the diagnosis of esophageal varices: a prospective three-center pilot study.Variceal bleeding is a major complication of cirrhosis, and is associated with a 20 % mortality at 6 weeks. Current international guidelines recommend that patients with cirrhosis are screened by conventional upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy, EGD) in order to detect esophageal varices. The recently developed PillCam ESO esophageal capsule endoscope has been shown to be an accurate diagnostic tool in the investigation of patients with gastroesophageal reflux and Barrett's esophagus. We compared the PillCam ESO capsule endoscope with EGD for the detection of esophagogastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy in patients with cirrhosis.A pilot trial was conducted at three sites. Patients with cirrhosis who were undergoing clinically indicated EGD for screening or surveillance for esophageal varices underwent a PillCam ESO study followed by an EGD within 48 hours. Capsule videos were assessed by an investigator who was blinded to the patient's medical history and EGD findings.A total of 23 of the 32 enrolled patients were found to have esophageal varices at both EGD and PillCam ESO endoscopy. In one patient PillCam ESO detected small varices that were not seen at EGD. The overall concordance between PillCam ESO and EGD was 96.9 % for the diagnosis of esophageal varices and 90.6 % for the diagnosis of portal hypertensive gastropathy. There were no adverse events related to PillCam ESO endoscopy.In a high-prevalence population, PillCam ESO may represent an accurate noninvasive alternative to EGD for the detection of esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy. A large-scale trial is underway to validate and expand these findings.Comparison of esophageal capsule endoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy for diagnosis of esophageal varices.To investigate the utility of esophageal capsule endoscopy in the diagnosis and grading of esophageal varices.Cirrhotic patients who were undergoing esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for variceal screening or surveillance underwent capsule endoscopy. Two separate blinded investigators read each capsule endoscopy for the following results: variceal grade, need for treatment with variceal banding or prophylaxis with beta-blocker therapy, degree of portal hypertensive gastropathy, and gastric varices.Fifty patients underwent both capsule and EGD. Forty-eight patients had both procedures on the same day, and 2 patients had capsule endoscopy within 72 h of EGD. The accuracy of capsule endoscopy to decide on the need for prophylaxis was 74%, with sensitivity of 63% and specificity of 82%. Inter-rater agreement was moderate (kappa = 0.56). Agreement between EGD and capsule endoscopy on grade of varices was 0.53 (moderate). Inter-rater reliability was good (kappa = 0.77). In diagnosis of portal hypertensive gastropathy, accuracy was 57%, with sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 17%. Two patients had gastric varices seen on EGD, one of which was seen on capsule endoscopy. There were no complications from capsule endoscopy.We conclude that capsule endoscopy has a limited role in deciding which patients would benefit from EGD with banding or beta-blocker therapy. More data is needed to assess accuracy for staging esophageal varices, PHG, and the detection of gastric varices.Feasibility and safety of string wireless capsule endoscopy in the diagnosis of esophageal varices.To assess the feasibility, safety, accuracy, and acceptability of "string-capsule endoscopy" in the evaluation of esophageal varices.Strings were attached to the wireless capsule endoscopy device to allow its controlled movement up and down the esophagus. Time of recording and discomfort associated with the procedure was documented. Patient's preference compared to conventional esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) was recorded. An independent endoscopist blinded to EGD diagnoses assessed the diagnostic accuracy of pictures obtained.Thirty patients with clinical liver cirrhosis (mean age: 54.4 yr; mean MELD score: 12.5, and mean Child-Pugh score: 6.3) were enrolled; 19 for surveillance and 11 for screening purposes. The procedure was safe (no strings were disrupted and no capsule was lost). The mean recording time was 5.8 min (2.9-8.7), the accuracy 96.7%, and discomfort was minimal. The majority (83.3%) of patients preferred string-capsule endoscopy to EGD.String-capsule endoscopy was feasible, safe, accurate, highly acceptable, and preferred by cirrhotic patients undergoing screening/surveillance of esophageal varices. The technique may prove to be more cost effective than conventional EGD.Esophageal capsule endoscopy versus esophagogastroduodenoscopy for evaluating portal hypertension: a prospective comparative study of performance and tolerance.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the most effective method for examining the upper gastrointestinal tract, and particularly for evaluating portal hypertension in cirrhotic patients, especially for screening purposes. The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility, safety, accuracy, and tolerance of PillCam ESO capsule endoscopy for this indication.In this prospective study, unsedated EGD and capsule endoscopy examinations were conducted on the same day in cirrhotic patients at the time of diagnosis. The patients quantified the tolerability (relative to pain, nausea, choking sensations, etc.) of the two procedures using a 100-mm visual analogue scale. The time required for the recording and for diagnosis with the capsule examination were documented, as were the patients' preferences in comparison with EGD. Two independent endoscopists blinded to the EGD diagnoses assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the images obtained.Twenty-one patients were included in the study (mean age 62, mean Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score 10.5, mean Child-Pugh score 7.3). The procedure was safe. One patient was unable to swallow the capsule. The mean recording time was 213 s (range 6 - 1200 s); the procedure accurately assessed the presence or absence of esophageal varices in 16 of 19 patients (84.2 %); and it correctly indicated a need for primary prophylaxis (esophageal varices of grade 2 or more and/or red signs) in 100 % of cases. The tolerability of the capsule endoscopy examination was significantly better, and all of the patients preferred capsule endoscopy to EGD (which was transnasal in 11 patients).Capsule endoscopy was feasible, safe, accurate, highly acceptable, and preferred by cirrhotic patients undergoing screening for portal hypertension. This new technique requires further and more extensive evaluation, as well as assessment of its cost-effectiveness.Esophageal capsule endoscopy for screening and surveillance of esophageal varices in patients with portal hypertension.Bleeding from esophageal varices (EV) is a serious consequence of portal hypertension. Current guidelines recommend screening patients with cirrhosis with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect varices. However, the unpleasantness and need for sedation of EGD may limit adherence to screening programs. Pilot studies have shown good performance of esophageal capsule endoscopy in detecting varices. This multicenter trial was designed to assess the diagnostic performance of capsule endoscopy in comparison with EGD. Patients undergoing EGD for screening or surveillance of EV underwent a capsule study previously. The study was designed as an equivalence study, assuming that a difference of <or=10% between capsule endoscopy and EGD in diagnosing EV would demonstrate equivalence. Two hundred eighty-eight patients were enrolled. Endoscopy was for screening in 195 patients and for surveillance of known EV in 93. Overall agreement for detecting EV between EGD and capsule endoscopy was 85.8%; the kappa score was 0.73. Capsule endoscopy had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of 84%, 88%, 92%, and 77%, respectively. The difference in diagnosing EV was 15.6% in favor of EGD. There was complete agreement on variceal grade in 227 of 288 cases (79%). In differentiating between medium/large varices requiring treatment and small/absent varices requiring surveillance, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value for capsule endoscopy were 78%, 96%, 87%, and 92%, respectively. Overall agreement on treatment decisions based on EV size was substantial at 91% (kappa = 0.77).We recommend that EGD be used to screen patients with cirrhosis for large EV. However, the minimal invasiveness, good tolerance, and good agreement of capsule endoscopy with EGD might increase adherence to screening programs. Whether this is the case needs to be determined.Influence of operator experience and reporting time on the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy screening for varices.Conflicting data exist concerning the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) for the screening of varices. No study has examined the influence of operator factors on the accuracy of ECE reporting. The primary aims of this study were, therefore, to examine how operator experience with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and operator reporting times of capsule videos influenced test accuracy. Twelve cirrhotic patients presenting for EGD had same-day ECE performed. The gold standard for variceal grade was determined using a panel of experienced endoscopists. Six novice capsule endoscopists, blinded to results of EGD, subsequently reported capsule videos for each of the 12 patients.Novice capsule endoscopists accurately identified high-risk varices. The mean area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators was 0.88 ±/-0.14. The mean sensitivity, specificity, positive, and negative predictive values for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators were 83%, 93%, 82%, and 97%, respectively. Years of prior EGD experience were not associated with accuracy of capsule reporting (OR = 0.9, 95% CI [0.74, 1.08]; p = .26). Time spent reporting capsule videos was associated with accuracy of capsule reporting for high-risk varices using British Society of Gastroenterology criteria (OR = 1.33, 95% CI [1.05, 1.08]; p = .018). Novice capsule endoscopists are able to accurately identify high-risk esophageal varices. Time taken to report capsule videos, but not amount of prior EGD experience, influenced capsule report accuracy. These findings may have implications for the design of further trials and the cost-effectiveness of ECE screening of varices.Study comparing oesophageal capsule endoscopy versus EGD in the detection of varices.Endoscopic screening and surveillance of cirrhotic patients for oesophageal varices is advocated before initiation of prophylactic therapy for prevention of the first variceal haemorrhage.To compare the diagnostic yield of oesophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) with Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for detecting and grading oesophageal varices and to determine patient tolerance for each procedure.Twenty consecutive cirrhotic patients scheduled for EGD were enrolled in the study.Patients underwent ECE followed by EGD. Patients completed a visual analogue scale after each procedure, assessing level of anxiety, pain, overall satisfaction, and willingness to repeat each procedure.On EGD, 19/20 patients had oesophageal varices. ECE detected varices in 13/19 (68% sensitivity). ECE identified nine out of ten varices rated grade II or higher on EGD. The post-study analogue scale showed a greater level of anxiety before EGD (avg. 2.75/10) versus ECE (avg. 1.5/10).ECE may be used in the assessment of EV. It appears to have more discordance with EGD when evaluating smaller varices. The minimal discomfort, lack of sedation, and decreased risk make ECE a possible substitute to EGD in patients unable or unwilling to undergo EGD.Esophageal capsule endoscopy in patients with suspected esophageal disease: double blinded comparison with esophagogastroduodenoscopy and assessment of interobserver variability.The study aim was to compare the diagnostic yield of capsule endoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) in patients with suspected esophageal disease. Secondary aims were to assess interobserver variability of capsule endoscopy readings and safety.In total, 98 patients (53 men, 53 +/- 13 years) with an indication for EGD were included. The patient population was artificially enriched to include two thirds of patients with abnormal esophageal findings at EGD, which was followed by capsule endoscopy. Capsule recordings were blindly read by three endoscopists, one from the center that recruited the patient and two from the other center. Study outcomes were the findings described on EGD and capsule endoscopy, agreement between EGD and capsule endoscopy for findings, quality of the capsule recording, and interobserver agreement for capsule endoscopy quality and findings.EGD was normal in 34 patients and showed esophageal findings in 62 (esophagitis 28, hiatus hernia 21, varices 21, Barrett's esophagus 11, others 7). Average esophageal transit time of the capsule was 361 +/- 393 seconds. Capsule endoscopy was normal in 36 patients but detected esophagitis in 23, hiatus hernia in 0, varices in 23, Barrett's esophagus in 18, and others in 4. The positive predictive value of capsule endoscopy was 80.0 % and the negative predictive value was 61.1 %. Overall agreement per patient was moderate between EGD and capsule endoscopy for the per-patient (kappa = 0.42) and per-findings (kappa = 0.40) analyses. Interobserver agreement between capsule endoscopy readings was moderate for findings (kappa = 0.39) and quality assessment (kappa = 0.24). No adverse event was observed after either EGD or capsule endoscopy.In this study, despite artificial prevalence enrichment, capsule endoscopy showed a moderate sensitivity and specificity in the detection of esophageal diseases.Esophageal capsule endoscopy vs. EGD for the evaluation of portal hypertension: a French prospective multicenter comparative study.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the standard method for the diagnosis of esophago-gastric varices. The aim of this prospective multicenter study was to evaluate the PillCam esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) for this indication.Patients presenting with cirrhotic or noncirrhotic portal hypertension underwent ECEfollowed by EGD at the time of diagnosis. Capsule recordings were blindly read by two endoscopists.A total of 120 patients (72 males, mean age: 58 years; mean Child-Pugh score: 7.2) were included. Esophageal varices were detected in 74 patients. No adverse event was observed after either EGD or ECE. Seven (6%) patients were unable to swallow the capsule. The mean recording time was 204 s (range 1-876). Sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value, and positive predictive value of ECE for the detection of esophageal varices were 77%, 86%, 69%, and 90%, respectively. Sensitivity, specificity, negative and positive predictive values of ECE for the indication of primary prophylaxis (esophageal varices > or = grade 2 and/or red signs) were 77, 88, 90, and 75%, respectively, and 85% of the patients were adequately classified for the indication (or not) of prophylaxis. Interobserver concordance for ECE readings was 79.4% for the diagnosis of varices, 66.4% for the grading of varices, and 89.7% for the indication of prophylaxis.This large multicenter study confirms the safety and acceptable accuracy of ECE for the evaluation of esophageal varices. ECE might be proposed as an alternative to EGD for the screening of portal hypertension, especially in patients unable or unwilling to undergo EGD.Defining the threshold: new data on the ability of capsule endoscopy to discriminate the size of esophageal varices.Endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy, EGD) to screen for esophageal varices (EV) is recommended in patients with portal hypertension. Reports indicate that capsule endoscopy (CE) is capable of identifying large/medium varices (L/MV) when the varix comprises more than 25% of the circumference of the field of view.We evaluated the ability of CE to discriminate the size of EV using this grading scale.Patients underwent CE and EGD on the same day. A blinded investigator interpreted capsule findings. CE labeled EV as L/MV if ≥25% of the lumen circumference was occupied, and small/none for <25%.A total of 37 patients were enrolled in this prospective, observational study at a single tertiary-care academic center. Three CE were excluded due to rapid esophageal transit time or technical malfunction. Using a 25% threshold, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for EC to discriminate L/MV were 23.5%, 88.2%, 66.7%, and 53.6%, respectively (κ=0.12). Reducing the threshold to 12.5% resulted in sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of 88.2%, 64.7%, 71.4%, and 84.6%, respectively (κ=0.53). A receiver-operator characteristic (ROC) curve showed a 15% threshold to be optimal in discriminating EV size using CE, resulting in sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPV of 76.5%, 82.4%, 81.3%, and 77.8%, respectively (κ=0.59).This study indicates that discriminating EV size by the current capsule scale is unreliable. Lowering the grading threshold improved the ability to discriminate EV size by CE. In the proper context, CE is an alternative to EGD to screen for EV.Capsule endoscopy is not as accurate as esophagogastroduodenoscopy in screening cirrhotic patients for varices.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the standard technique for screening cirrhotic patients for high-risk varices and other significant upper gastrointestinal lesions (HRVLs). We investigated whether esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) is as convenient and accurate as EGD for the detection of HRVLs.We analyzed data from 65 cirrhotic patients without prior upper gastrointestinal bleeding who were examined for varices and HRVLs by ECE and EGD (both procedures were performed on the same day). EGD was performed by 2 physicians (75% of patients were unsedated) who used standard grading for esophageal and gastric varices, portal hypertensive gastropathy, and HRVLs. Coded capsule tracings were read by 2 investigators, blinded to the EGD findings, using standard grading.The median procedure time for EGD (with or without biopsy collection) was 3 minutes, compared with 20 minutes for ECE. The overall accuracy for diagnosis of esophageal varices was 63.2% ± 5.9%; for detection of esophageal varices red marks was 68.8% ± 5.4%; and for diagnosis of other HRVLs was 51.5% ± 4.2%. The interobserver agreement in the diagnosis of esophageal varices was 90.8%; in the detection of esophageal varices red marks was 86.2%; and in the diagnosis of other HRVLs was 7.3%.ECE is not as accurate as EGD in the diagnosis of esophageal varices and red markings or in grading esophageal varices. Moreover, ECE had poor accuracy in grading portal hypertensive gastropathy and detecting ulcers, gastric varices, and other significant upper gastrointestinal lesions. It took significantly longer to perform ECE and interpret the results than for EGD. These findings do not support ECE as a preferred tool for screening esophageal varices and HRVLs.Small-bowel lesions caused by portal hypertension of schistosomal origin: a capsule endoscopy pilot study.Schistosomiasis is a highly prevalent disease. It can evolve to its hepatosplenic form in up to 10% of the cases. The small-bowel lesions developed during the hepatosplenic stage of the disease have not been described in vivo.The aim of this study was to describe, for the first time, in a pilot study, the endoscopic aspects of the lesions in the small bowel of patients with portal hypertension due to schistosomiasis, using the PillCam SB, and to determine the usefulness of the method for the diagnosis of esophageal varices.Case series.Tertiary-care medical center.Nine nonrandomized patients with hepatosplenic schistosomiasis and esophageal varices without previous GI bleeding were selected based on findings from the PillCam SB. Patients using medications that could alter the coagulation, with history of abdominal surgery, who were undergoing treatment of the portal hypertension other than beta-blocker, and with symptoms suggesting bowel obstruction were excluded. The findings were interpreted by a single endoscopist.Capsule endoscopy was able to diagnose esophageal varices in all 9 patients. All of the patients presented angioectasias and venectasias in the small bowel. Small-bowel varices were present in 22.2% of the patients; edema and erosions were found in 66.7% and 88.9%, respectively. Lesions of so-called "scarred mucosa" were found in 55.5% of the patients.Small number of patients; case series.The PillCam SB was effective, giving a significant contribution to the description of the esophageal varices and small-bowel lesions of the patients with portal hypertension caused by Schistosoma mansoni.The accuracy of PillCam ESO capsule endoscopy versus conventional upper endoscopy for the diagnosis of esophageal varices: a prospective three-center pilot study.Variceal bleeding is a major complication of cirrhosis, and is associated with a 20 % mortality at 6 weeks. Current international guidelines recommend that patients with cirrhosis are screened by conventional upper endoscopy (esophagogastroduodenoscopy, EGD) in order to detect esophageal varices. The recently developed PillCam ESO esophageal capsule endoscope has been shown to be an accurate diagnostic tool in the investigation of patients with gastroesophageal reflux and Barrett's esophagus. We compared the PillCam ESO capsule endoscope with EGD for the detection of esophagogastric varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy in patients with cirrhosis.A pilot trial was conducted at three sites. Patients with cirrhosis who were undergoing clinically indicated EGD for screening or surveillance for esophageal varices underwent a PillCam ESO study followed by an EGD within 48 hours. Capsule videos were assessed by an investigator who was blinded to the patient's medical history and EGD findings.A total of 23 of the 32 enrolled patients were found to have esophageal varices at both EGD and PillCam ESO endoscopy. In one patient PillCam ESO detected small varices that were not seen at EGD. The overall concordance between PillCam ESO and EGD was 96.9 % for the diagnosis of esophageal varices and 90.6 % for the diagnosis of portal hypertensive gastropathy. There were no adverse events related to PillCam ESO endoscopy.In a high-prevalence population, PillCam ESO may represent an accurate noninvasive alternative to EGD for the detection of esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy. A large-scale trial is underway to validate and expand these findings.Comparison of esophageal capsule endoscopy and esophagogastroduodenoscopy for diagnosis of esophageal varices.To investigate the utility of esophageal capsule endoscopy in the diagnosis and grading of esophageal varices.Cirrhotic patients who were undergoing esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) for variceal screening or surveillance underwent capsule endoscopy. Two separate blinded investigators read each capsule endoscopy for the following results: variceal grade, need for treatment with variceal banding or prophylaxis with beta-blocker therapy, degree of portal hypertensive gastropathy, and gastric varices.Fifty patients underwent both capsule and EGD. Forty-eight patients had both procedures on the same day, and 2 patients had capsule endoscopy within 72 h of EGD. The accuracy of capsule endoscopy to decide on the need for prophylaxis was 74%, with sensitivity of 63% and specificity of 82%. Inter-rater agreement was moderate (kappa = 0.56). Agreement between EGD and capsule endoscopy on grade of varices was 0.53 (moderate). Inter-rater reliability was good (kappa = 0.77). In diagnosis of portal hypertensive gastropathy, accuracy was 57%, with sensitivity of 96% and specificity of 17%. Two patients had gastric varices seen on EGD, one of which was seen on capsule endoscopy. There were no complications from capsule endoscopy.We conclude that capsule endoscopy has a limited role in deciding which patients would benefit from EGD with banding or beta-blocker therapy. More data is needed to assess accuracy for staging esophageal varices, PHG, and the detection of gastric varices.Feasibility and safety of string wireless capsule endoscopy in the diagnosis of esophageal varices.To assess the feasibility, safety, accuracy, and acceptability of "string-capsule endoscopy" in the evaluation of esophageal varices.Strings were attached to the wireless capsule endoscopy device to allow its controlled movement up and down the esophagus. Time of recording and discomfort associated with the procedure was documented. Patient's preference compared to conventional esophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) was recorded. An independent endoscopist blinded to EGD diagnoses assessed the diagnostic accuracy of pictures obtained.Thirty patients with clinical liver cirrhosis (mean age: 54.4 yr; mean MELD score: 12.5, and mean Child-Pugh score: 6.3) were enrolled; 19 for surveillance and 11 for screening purposes. The procedure was safe (no strings were disrupted and no capsule was lost). The mean recording time was 5.8 min (2.9-8.7), the accuracy 96.7%, and discomfort was minimal. The majority (83.3%) of patients preferred string-capsule endoscopy to EGD.String-capsule endoscopy was feasible, safe, accurate, highly acceptable, and preferred by cirrhotic patients undergoing screening/surveillance of esophageal varices. The technique may prove to be more cost effective than conventional EGD.Esophageal capsule endoscopy versus esophagogastroduodenoscopy for evaluating portal hypertension: a prospective comparative study of performance and tolerance.Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) is the most effective method for examining the upper gastrointestinal tract, and particularly for evaluating portal hypertension in cirrhotic patients, especially for screening purposes. The aim of this study was to assess the feasibility, safety, accuracy, and tolerance of PillCam ESO capsule endoscopy for this indication.In this prospective study, unsedated EGD and capsule endoscopy examinations were conducted on the same day in cirrhotic patients at the time of diagnosis. The patients quantified the tolerability (relative to pain, nausea, choking sensations, etc.) of the two procedures using a 100-mm visual analogue scale. The time required for the recording and for diagnosis with the capsule examination were documented, as were the patients' preferences in comparison with EGD. Two independent endoscopists blinded to the EGD diagnoses assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the images obtained.Twenty-one patients were included in the study (mean age 62, mean Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score 10.5, mean Child-Pugh score 7.3). The procedure was safe. One patient was unable to swallow the capsule. The mean recording time was 213 s (range 6 - 1200 s); the procedure accurately assessed the presence or absence of esophageal varices in 16 of 19 patients (84.2 %); and it correctly indicated a need for primary prophylaxis (esophageal varices of grade 2 or more and/or red signs) in 100 % of cases. The tolerability of the capsule endoscopy examination was significantly better, and all of the patients preferred capsule endoscopy to EGD (which was transnasal in 11 patients).Capsule endoscopy was feasible, safe, accurate, highly acceptable, and preferred by cirrhotic patients undergoing screening for portal hypertension. This new technique requires further and more extensive evaluation, as well as assessment of its cost-effectiveness.Esophageal capsule endoscopy for screening and surveillance of esophageal varices in patients with portal hypertension.Bleeding from esophageal varices (EV) is a serious consequence of portal hypertension. Current guidelines recommend screening patients with cirrhosis with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to detect varices. However, the unpleasantness and need for sedation of EGD may limit adherence to screening programs. Pilot studies have shown good performance of esophageal capsule endoscopy in detecting varices. This multicenter trial was designed to assess the diagnostic performance of capsule endoscopy in comparison with EGD. Patients undergoing EGD for screening or surveillance of EV underwent a capsule study previously. The study was designed as an equivalence study, assuming that a difference of <or=10% between capsule endoscopy and EGD in diagnosing EV would demonstrate equivalence. Two hundred eighty-eight patients were enrolled. Endoscopy was for screening in 195 patients and for surveillance of known EV in 93. Overall agreement for detecting EV between EGD and capsule endoscopy was 85.8%; the kappa score was 0.73. Capsule endoscopy had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of 84%, 88%, 92%, and 77%, respectively. The difference in diagnosing EV was 15.6% in favor of EGD. There was complete agreement on variceal grade in 227 of 288 cases (79%). In differentiating between medium/large varices requiring treatment and small/absent varices requiring surveillance, the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value for capsule endoscopy were 78%, 96%, 87%, and 92%, respectively. Overall agreement on treatment decisions based on EV size was substantial at 91% (kappa = 0.77).We recommend that EGD be used to screen patients with cirrhosis for large EV. However, the minimal invasiveness, good tolerance, and good agreement of capsule endoscopy with EGD might increase adherence to screening programs. Whether this is the case needs to be determined.Influence of operator experience and reporting time on the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy screening for varices.Conflicting data exist concerning the accuracy of esophageal capsule endoscopy (ECE) for the screening of varices. No study has examined the influence of operator factors on the accuracy of ECE reporting. The primary aims of this study were, therefore, to examine how operator experience with esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and operator reporting times of capsule videos influenced test accuracy. Twelve cirrhotic patients presenting for EGD had same-day ECE performed. The gold standard for variceal grade was determined using a panel of experienced endoscopists. Six novice capsule endoscopists, blinded to results of EGD, subsequently reported capsule videos for each of the 12 patients.Novice capsule endoscopists accurately identified high-risk varices. The mean area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators was 0.88 ±/-0.14. The mean sensitivity, specificity, positive, and negative predictive values for identifying high-risk varices for the six operators were 83%, 93%, 82%, and 97%, respectively. Years of prior EGD experience were not associated with accuracy of capsule reporting (OR = 0.9, 95% CI [0.74, 1.08]; p = .26). Time spent reporting capsule videos was associated with accuracy of capsule reporting for high-risk varices using British Society of Gastroenterology criteria (OR = 1.33, 95% CI [1.05, 1.08]; p = .018). Novice capsule endoscopists are able to accurately identify high-risk esophageal varices. Time taken to report capsule videos, but not amount of prior EGD experience, influenced capsule report accuracy. These findings may have implications for the design of further trials and the cost-effectiveness of ECE screening of varices.