The comparison of thyroxine versus thyroxine plus oral iodine in the treatment of congenital hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency.Iodine deficiency is one of the most important causes of congenital hypothyroidism. In addition to thyroid hormone replacement, iodine supplementation is also given to newborns with congenital hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency. We aimed to determine whether it is beneficial to administer iodine supplementation in addition to the L-thyroxine (L-T4) treatment of newborns with congenital hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency.Of 51 newborns, 26 who were diagnosed with congenital hypothyroidism due to iodine deficiency were treated with L-T4. The remaining 25 cases were given L-T4 plus 100 μg/day of oral iodine. Free triiodothyronine (fT3), free thyroxine (fT4), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), thyroglobulin (TG), thyroid volume, urine iodine and breast milk iodine levels were measured in the first and third months of treatment, and the data were compared between the two groups.First- and third-month values of fT3, fT4, TSH, TG and thyroid volume for both groups were statistically similar. There was no significant difference between the two groups in respect to falling levels of fT3 and TSH, the rate of increase of fT4 levels or the shrinkage rate of thyroid volume.In this study, the addition of oral iodine to L-T4 treatment provided no benefit compared to treatment with L-T4 alone.A summary of the iodine supplementation study protocol (I2S2): a UK multicentre randomised controlled trial in preterm infants.This paper summarises the study protocol for the randomised controlled trial of iodine supplementation in preterm infants. Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxine, and thyroxine is essential for normal brain development in utero and for the first 2-3 years of life. The recommended iodine intake in parenteral nutrition regimens is 1 μg/kg/day and commercially available parenteral solutions for infants reflect these recommendations. In the absence of other iodine sources, infants are vulnerable to negative iodine balance and insufficiency. As many preterm infants are fed parenterally for prolonged periods with solutions which have been shown to be iodine-deficient, the I2S2 Trial was designed to establish whether iodine supplementation of preterm infants benefits neurodevelopment.Supplemental Iodide for Preterm Infants and Developmental Outcomes at 2 Years: An RCT.The recommendation for enteral iodide intake for preterm infants is 30 to 40 μg/kg per day and 1 μg/kg per day for parenteral intake. Preterm infants are vulnerable to iodide insufficiency and thyroid dysfunction. The hypothesis tested whether, compared with placebo, iodide supplementation of preterm infants improves neurodevelopment.A randomized controlled trial of iodide supplementation versus placebo in infants <31 weeks' gestation. Trial solutions (sodium iodide or sodium chloride; dose 30 μg/kg per day) were given within 42 hours of birth to the equivalent of 34 weeks' gestation. The only exclusion criterion was maternal iodide exposure during pregnancy or delivery. Whole blood levels of thyroxine, thyrotropin, and thyroid-binding globulin were measured on 4 specific postnatal days. The primary outcome was neurodevelopmental status at 2 years of age, measured by using the Bayley Scales of Infant Development-III. The primary analyses are by intention-to-treat, and data are presented also for survivors.One thousand two hundred seventy-three infants (637 intervention, 636 placebo) were recruited from 21 UK neonatal units. One hundred thirty-one infants died, and neurodevelopmental assessments were undertaken in 498 iodide and 499 placebo-supplemented infants. There were no significant differences between the intervention and placebo groups in the primary outcome: mean difference cognitive score, -0.34, 95% confidence interval (CI) -2.57 to 1.89; motor composite score, 0.21, 95% CI -2.23 to 2.65; and language composite score, -0.05, 95% CI -2.48 to 2.39. There was evidence of weak interaction between iodide supplementation and hypothyroxinemic status in the language composite score and 1 subtest score.Overall iodide supplementation provided no benefit to neurodevelopment measured at 2 years of age.Randomised trial of iodine intake and thyroid status in preterm infants.Low levels of circulating thyroid hormones have been associated with poorer general and neurodevelopmental outcome in preterm babies and it has been speculated that the association is causal. Low levels of circulating thyroid hormone have been reported after inadequate intake of iodine in preterm infants being fed milk formula.To investigate whether increased iodine intake from supplemented preterm formula would improve thyroid hormone levels in preterm babies (this study) and hence improve neurodevelopmental status (planned subsequent study).A total of 121 preterm infants were entered into a randomised controlled trial of standard (68 microg/l) versus increased (272 microg/l) iodine in preterm formula.The two groups were comparable at recruitment. No evidence of an effect of the intervention on thyroid hormone levels was seen up to 41 weeks after conception.Calls for increased iodine content of preterm infant formulas are not justified by this study.