Hands4U: a multifaceted strategy to implement guideline-based recommendations to prevent hand eczema in health care workers: design of a randomised controlled trial and (cost) effectiveness evaluation.Workers in wet work occupations have a risk for developing hand eczema. Prevention strategies exist, but compliance to the proposed recommendations is poor. Therefore, a multifaceted implementation strategy (MIS) is developed to implement these recommendations to reduce hand eczema among health care workers performing wet work.This study is a randomised controlled trial in three university hospitals in the Netherlands. Randomisation to the control or intervention group is performed at department level. The control group receives a leaflet containing the recommendations only. The intervention group receives the MIS which consists of five parts: 1) within a department, a participatory working group is formed to identify problems with the implementation of the recommendations, to find solutions for it and implement these solutions; 2) role models will help their colleagues in performing the desired behaviour; 3) education to all workers will enhance knowledge about (the prevention of) hand eczema; 4) reminders will be placed at the department reminding workers to use the recommendations; 5) workers receive the same leaflet as the control group containing the recommendations. Data are collected by questionnaires at baseline and after 3, 6, 9 and 12 months. The primary outcome measure is self-reported hand eczema. The most important secondary outcome measures are symptoms of hand eczema; actual use of the recommendations; sick leave; work productivity; and health care costs.Analyses will be performed according to the intention to treat principle. Cost-effectiveness of the MIS will be evaluated from both the societal and the employer's perspective.The prevention of hand eczema is important for the hospital environment. If the MIS has proven to be effective, a major improvement in the health of health care workers can be obtained. Results are expected in 2014.NTR2812.Hands4U: the effects of a multifaceted implementation strategy on hand eczema prevalence in a healthcare setting. Results of a randomized controlled trial.Healthcare workers have an increased risk of developing hand eczema. A multifaceted implementation strategy was developed to implement a guideline to prevent hand eczema among healthcare workers.To investigate the effects of the implementation strategy on self-reported hand eczema and preventive behaviour.A randomized controlled trial was performed. A total of 48 departments (n = 1649) were randomly allocated to the multifaceted implementation strategy or the control group. The strategy consisted of education, participatory working groups, and role models. Outcome measures were self-reported hand eczema and preventive behaviour. Data were collected at baseline, and 3, 6, 9 and 12 months of follow-up.Participants in the intervention group were significantly more likely to report hand eczema [odds ratio (OR) 1.45; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.03-2.04], and they reported significantly less hand washing (B, - 0.38; 95%CI: - 0.48 to - 0.27), reported significantly more frequent use of a moisturizer (B, 0.30; 95%CI: 0.22-0.39) and were more likely to report wearing cotton undergloves (OR 6.33; 95%CI: 3.23-12.41) than participants in the control group 12 months after baseline.The strategy implemented can be used in practice, as it showed positive effects on preventive behaviour. More research is needed to investigate the unexpected effects on hand eczema.Effectiveness of skin protection measures in prevention of occupational hand eczema: results of a prospective randomized controlled trial over a follow-up period of 1 year.We recently found a very low adherence to a generally recommended skin protection regimen in a sample of 1355 metalworkers.The present study assessed the effectiveness of skin protection as presently recommended, especially the differential contribution of skin care and skin protection, to the prevention of occupational hand eczema. Methods Of 1355 metalworkers screened, 1020 male volunteers, all fit for work, were recruited for a prospective intervention study with four arms (skin care, skin protection, both combined, and control group, i.e. no recommendation). The study was performed from winter 2006/2007 to spring 2008, following each subject for up for 12 months. Both hands were examined using a quantitative skin score, and a standardized personal interview was performed three times. The change of the objective skin score from baseline to 12 months was used as primary outcome measure.After 12 months 800 subjects were included (78.4% of those recruited). The compliance to follow the randomized measure depended on the recommended measure and ranged from 73.7% to 88.7%. While in the control group a significant deterioration was found, the largest and significant improvement was noted in the group following the generally recommended skin protection programme (skin care + skin protection) followed by skin protection alone as second best.The generally recommended skin protection regimen seems to provide effective prevention of occupational skin disease. Therefore, the compliance to follow the skin protection regimen, especially the use of skin protection, should be enhanced.Effectiveness of a hand care regimen with moisturizer in manufacturing facilities where workers are prone to occupational irritant dermatitis.Limited information documents the prevention and treatment benefits of a hand care regimen using moisturizer in a controlled manner for employees in typical manufacturing situations.The objective was to assess the effectiveness of a comprehensive skin care program including skin conditioning lotion in multiple manufacturing environments where employees are at high risk for skin disease.A randomized trial test design with multiple measures, including skin bioengineering measurement techniques, visual grading, and self-assessment questionnaires, was used to broadly characterize skin condition.Comparison of the change in the skin condition of workers using the full hand care regimen with moisturizer versus a control group using a regimen without moisturizer demonstrated significant (p < .05) improvements in multiple measures after 1 to 2 weeks. Corneometer readings consistently showed significant improvement for employees using moisturizer, regardless of their work location.Improved skin condition resulted from the regular use of an effective skin conditioning hand moisturizer as part of a skin care regimen in work environments in which workers were prone to experiencing occupational irritant contact dermatitis.Economic Evaluation of a Multifaceted Implementation Strategy for the Prevention of Hand Eczema Among Healthcare Workers in Comparison with a Control Group: The Hands4U Study.The aim of this study was to evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a multifaceted implementation strategy for the prevention of hand eczema in comparison with a control group among healthcare workers. A total of 48 departments (n=1,649) were randomly allocated to the implementation strategy or the control group. Data on hand eczema and costs were collected at baseline and every 3 months. Cost-effectiveness analyses were performed using linear multilevel analyses. The probability of the implementation strategy being cost-effective gradually increased with an increasing willingness-to-pay, to 0.84 at a ceiling ratio of €590,000 per person with hand eczema prevented (societal perspective). The implementation strategy appeared to be not cost-effective in comparison with the control group (societal perspective), nor was it cost-beneficial to the employer. However, this study had some methodological problems which should be taken into account when interpreting the results. Prevention of work-related skin problems in student auxiliary nurses: an intervention study.The present study was designed as an intervention study to investigate whether an educational programme was efficient in preventing work-related skin problems on the hands. 107 student auxiliary nurses (61 in the intervention group and 46 in the control group) were followed during the first 10 weeks of their initial practical training in county hospitals. The intervention group was given an educational programme before the practical training started. For evaluation the participants had questionnaires, clinical examination of the hands, measurement of transepidermal water loss (TEWL) and patch testing. The use of hand disinfectants, which was discouraged in the educational programme, was significantly lower in the intervention group as compared to the control group (p=0.002). 48% of the intervention group and 58% of the control group had aggravation of skin problems during practical training (p>0.05). Use of hand disinfectant agents was significantly associated with aggravation of skin problems (p=0.016). A significant increase in TEWL for the control group (p<0.005), but not for the intervention group, was seen after 10 weeks of practical training. In conclusion, the present intervention study shows promising results from the use of an educational programme.[Efficacy of the use of barrier creams in the prevention of dermatological diseases in textile dyeing and printing plant workers: results of a randomized trial].A total of 942 workers of 13 dyeing and printing factories in the area of Como (N. Italy) were examined in order to detect skin complaints on the hands and forearms. Of these, 868 were eligible for and consented to participate in a controlled and randomized experiment aimed at assessing the efficacy of using barrier creams in practical circumstances. 657 workers underwent all three control examinations arranged over about one year. In the randomized group for treatment with barrier creams the cumulative incidence of objective skin lesions was significantly lower than in the group in which no particular recommendation of use was made (44.5% versus 54.4% positive for objective examination in at least one of the three control examinations after recruitment: 95% confidence limits of the difference between 2%-17% percentages; 39.9% versus 47.0% in subjects who were negative at the recruitment examination, 59.0% versus 76.8% in subjects who were positive at the recruitment examination). The use of a hydrocarbon cream was significantly more effective than using a silicone cream (95% confidence limits of the differences of cumulative incidences: -10.9% +20.7% comparing silicone creams with non-treatment; 2.8%-20.2% comparing hydrocarbon creams with non-treatment).Hands4U: the effectiveness of a multifaceted implementation strategy on behaviour related to the prevention of hand eczema-a randomised controlled trial among healthcare workers.To investigate the effects of a multifaceted implementation strategy on behaviour, behavioural determinants, knowledge and awareness of healthcare workers regarding the use of recommendations to prevent hand eczema.The Hands4U study is a randomised controlled trial. A total of 48 departments (n=1649 workers) were randomly allocated to the multifaceted implementation strategy or the control group (minimal implementation strategy). Within the departments designated to the multifaceted implementation strategy, participatory working groups were set up to enhance the implementation of the recommendations for hand eczema. In addition, working group members were trained to become role models, and an education session was given within the department. Outcome measures were awareness, knowledge, receiving information, behaviour and behavioural determinants. Data were collected at baseline, with a 3- and 6-month follow-up.Statistically significant effects were found after 6 months for awareness (OR 6.30; 95% CI 3.41 to 11.63), knowledge (B 0.74; 95% CI 0.54 to 0.95), receiving information (OR 9.81; 95% CI 5.60 to 17.18), washing hands (B -0.40; 95% -0.51 to -0.29), use of moisturiser (B 0.29; 95% CI 0.20 to 0.38), cotton under gloves (OR 3.94; 95% CI 2.04 to 7.60) and the overall compliance measure (B 0.14; 95% CI 0.02 to 0.26), as a result of the multifaceted implementation strategy. No effects were found for behavioural determinants.The multifaceted implementation strategy can be used in healthcare settings to enhance the implementation of recommendations for the prevention of hand eczema.NTR2812.A new skin protecting ointment against acrylic resins.In order to protect the hands of dentists, dental technicians and dental nurses from direct contacts with acrylic monomer, a new type of protective monoglyceride containing ointment has been introduced. The monoglyceride-based ointment was found to prevent penetration of the monomeric part of an autopolymerising acrylic resin and was also shown to have significantly smaller decreasing influence on the ability to manipulate instruments and materials than a compared silicone-based ointment. Furthermore, even with addition of 1% by volume of the monoglyceride-based ointment there was no marked influence on the mechanical properties (elastic modulous and ultimate tensile strength) of an investigated acrylic tray material.Primary prevention in health care employees: a prospective intervention study with a 3-year training period.Irritant contact dermatitis is a mayor problem in health care employees. Because educational programs have shown convincing success in certain occupations (e.g. in hairdressers), this study investigates the effect of a special training program in health care trainees. 521 trainees from 14 nursing schools in Central Germany were randomly divided in 2 groups, (i) an intervention group with a regular teaching protocol regarding all aspects of primary prevention and (ii) a control group without any further teaching. Morphological changes of the hands, use of hand care creams and knowledge regarding skin care were evaluated regularly during their 3 years lasting training period (1999-2002). In the intervention group, we found at the end of the 3-year training period a significant better skin condition of the hands than in the control group: a 3-year prevalence of morphological skin changes of 66.7% versus 89.3%. The unteached trainees (control group) had an odds ratio (OR) of 4.8 [95% confidential interval (CI): 2.9-7.8] for developing any skin changes on the hands after 3 years. Besides the effect of the teaching, the history of hand dermatitis before the study start was an independent risk factor for development of further hand dermatitis [OR 1.9, 95% CI: 1.0-3.6). Age and sex showed no influence on the skin condition. Atopic constitution had an influence on the development of skin changes only at the evaluation after 18 month. The observed effect in the intervention group may best be explained by different behaviour of the trainees, e.g. the amount of hand washing was reduced, while procedure of hand disinfection remained unchanged compared with the control group. However, the amount of used skin care cream did not differ between the both groups. This study shows that primary prevention of skin disease by regularly teaching during the training period of medical employees can effectively reduce the risk of development of irritant skin changes of the hands. Therefore, teaching and continuous motivation regarding preventive individual and collective measures during the training of medical staff should be an obliged part of the curriculum.[Efficacy of barrier creams in comparison to skin care products in dental laboratory technicians--a controlled trial].Irritant contact dermatitis of the hands is very common in dental laboratory technicians due to frequent contact with various irritants. Barrier creams (HS) are often avoided because a tight grip of tools and small objects is necessary; furthermore dental objects must not be contaminated by HS. In this study the efficacy of HS applied during working hours was compared to skin care products (HP) applied only after work.2 popular commercial HS (HS-1, HS-2) and 2 moisturizers containing urea and beeswax respectively (HP-1, HP-2) were evaluated in 5 laboratories by a total of 192 technicians. Every technician used one HS (several applications during working hours) and one HP applied at home at least once daily for 4 weeks each with a wash-out period of 2 weeks in between. The sequence HS-HP, HP-HS was randomized for every laboratory in two single blind cross over designs for both combinations (HS-1 with HP-1, HS-2 with HP-2). The technicians scored the products on a scale of efficacy (worse, none, good, very good). The skin condition was evaluated by a dermatologist at the beginning of the study, after 4, 6 and 10 weeks on a scale for erythema, infiltration, vesicles, fissures and scaling to produce a sum score. Furthermore, transepidermal water loss (TEWL) was measured on the back of the hand and on the ventral aspect of the forearm at the beginnung and the end of the 4 weeks application period. The quotient of these two parameters was used for statistical evaluation (covariance analysis).The assessment of either "good" or "very good" was as follows: HS-1 58%; HS-2 67%; HP-1 77%; HP-2 98%. Both HP, particularly HP-2, were judged superior to either HS. This was confirmed by the improvement of the skin condition (HS-1 35%; HS-2 44%; HP-1 55%; HP-2 56%). Statistical significance of the differences in TEWL data was clearly demonstrated: HP-1 better than HS-1 (p = 0.007); HP-2 better than HS-2 (p = 0.03). The acceptance of the products was high. The majority was willing to continue its usage after the study (68 %-89 %).The results demonstrate that the use of after work moisturizers is highly beneficial and under the chosen study conditions even superior to barrier creams applied at work. This approach is more practical for many professions and may effectively reduce the frequency of irritant contact dermatitis.Double-blind, randomized trial of scheduled use of a novel barrier cream and an oil-containing lotion for protecting the hands of health care workers.Many health care workers suffer severe hand irritation, with cracking and bleeding, as a consequence of frequent handwashing and glove use. Integumentary breakdown has major implications for nosocomial infection control and promotes the spread of bloodborne viruses. The potential benefits of scheduled use of hand-care agents-lotions or creams-in health care workers has not been established by controlled trial.To compare the value of an oil-containing lotion with a novel barrier skin cream in health care workers with severe hand irritation.Prospective, randomized, double-blind trial.University medical center.Fifty-four health care workers from multiple departments with severe hand irritation, 74% with one or more full-thickness cracks or other integumentary breaks.Objective and subjective parameters for scaling, cracking, weeping, bleeding, and pain were scored by two blinded investigators weekly for 4 weeks, and the hands of subjects were cultured quantitatively at the onset and after 2 weeks and 4 weeks.Subjects in both groups experienced marked improvement in overall hand condition (each, P <.02), particularly in scaling, cracking, and pain. Persons randomized to use of the oil-containing lotion showed greater improvement (mean score, from 6.5 to 2.7 vs 6.8 to 4. 7, P =.006). In 18 (69%) of 26 persons who used the control lotion, all full-thickness integumentary breaks were healed and pain was totally resolved, compared with 14 (52%) of 27 persons who used the barrier cream (P =.26). Use of the two agents in a scheduled fashion had no effect on the levels or profile of the transient hand flora. However, by the fourth week of use, handwashing frequency was 50% higher in subjects randomized to use the control lotion than it was in subjects randomized to use the barrier cream (17.8 vs 11.7 times per day, P =.04).Use of an oil-containing lotion or a barrier cream on a scheduled basis can substantially protect the hands of vulnerable health care workers against drying and chemical irritation, preventing skin breakdown and promoting more frequent handwashing.Effectiveness of skin protection creams in the prevention of occupational dermatitis: results of a randomized, controlled trial.The aim of the trial was to investigate whether the publicized effects of skin protection creams can be replicated in a real occupational setting during activities that expose the skin.A prospective, randomized, four-tailed controlled pilot trial was performed to compare the effect of skin protection and skin care alone or in combination with cleansing against a control group (only cleansing). Two branches were selected for the investigation: the building industry and the timber industry. A total of 1,006 workers from these two branches were recruited, and out of these 485 workers were examined longitudinally for at least three time points over 1 year (lost for follow-up: 430 workers, exclusion: 91 workers). At each time point, as a primary outcome measure, we assessed the condition of the skin at both hands in a blinded manner and the individual was assigned to one of the following categories: no eczema, mild, moderate and severe eczema. As a secondary outcome measure, the worker's transepidermal water loss (TEWL) was measured under standardized conditions at the back of both hands. In addition, the workers were asked to evaluate their skin condition during the study.With regard to differences in the occurrence of eczemas, we found only in workers in building industry without application of skin protection or skin care creams a statistical significant increase in the incidence between the first and the second visit and a statistical significant decrease in the incidence between the second and third visit. When evaluating the secondary outcome-measurement changes in the TEWL values, an improvement was found for the group skin protection and skin care in combination and by skin care alone. Females in the timber industry started with better TEWL values than males, which may be due to better overall skin care. In this group we found an improvement for the group skin protection and skin care in combination and by skin protection alone. For skin protection alone, we noted a slight, but not significant improvement in all other groups. The subjective improvement of skin condition was reported from the participants who used skin protection and skin care in combination.Taking all these secondary-outcome measurements together, the main result of this study was that skin protection creams alone have a small effect on the skin barrier in workers in the building and timber industries compared with skin care alone or in combination with skin protection.[Double blind test with a protective ointment (Ivosin) on the hands of cement workers].56 builder's labourers manipulating lime cement applied a protective cream on their hands and 57 used a placebo in a double blind test of two months' duration. The labourers, the doctors who surveyed the condition of their hands, and the statistician who analyzed the results knew only that one cream had a blue label, and the other a green one. Before and after the test, the presence or the absence of certain symptoms on the hands were objectively examined, while the subjective opinion of the labourers was registered at the end of the test. As usual in tests of that kind, the great majority of the labourers (more than 75%) were satisfied, 62% of them acknowledged an improvement. That percentage justified a comparative double-blind study that revealed a much higher quota (86% of the test persons) of satisfaction among the labourers treated with Ivosin than in the placebo group (66%). That difference was statistically significant. On the other hand, no objective difference could be revealed between the two groups. It was impossible to discover among the symptoms studied, any objective cause of that subjective difference.Prevention of hand dermatitis in bakers' apprentices: different efficacy of skin protection measures and UVB hardening.The objective of this controlled intervention study was to quantify the efficacy of skin protection (SP) measures and ultraviolet B (UVB) hardening in the prevention of hand dermatitis in bakers' apprentices.SP measures were compared against UVB hardening in a controlled clinical trial of 94 apprentices. The apprentices were assigned to the intervention arms class-wise. Bakers' apprentices involved in a previous follow-up study served as additional controls representing no intervention. The apprentices were interviewed and examined in a standardised way at the beginning of the training and at 4 monthly follow-ups. Transepidermal water loss (TEWL) was measured at the back of the hands.Demographic profile and atopy criteria were equally distributed in the two intervention arms and the control group. Point prevalence of hand dermatitis after 6 months was highest in the controls (29.1%) followed by the UVB (19.4%) and the SP group (13.3%). UVB hardening and SP measures reduced hand dermatitis prevalence by 9.7% (95%CI: -8.5 to 28.1) and 15.7% (95%CI: -2.4 to 33.9), respectively. Application of SP measures reduced the odds ratios (ORs) for hand dermatitis 0.8-fold (95%CI: 0.17-3.70) and 0.33-fold (95%CI: 0.09-1.23) compared with the UVB group and the controls, respectively. These clinical trends were confirmed by statistically significant differences in TEWL values. TEWL values were consistently higher in the UVB group than in the SP group ( P=0.002).This study provided evidence, based on significant differences in TEWL levels, that general SP measures may be more effective than UV light hardening of the skin, which in turn was more effective than no intervention. This trend was supported by the frequency of development of clinical hand dermatitis, although differences did not reach statistical significance. A multi-centre trial is recommended to confirm the efficacy of SP measures in a larger randomised study.Skin tolerance and effectiveness of two hand decontamination procedures in everyday hospital use.Hand decontamination is crucial to control nosocomial infections. The utility of hand decontamination is related not only to its antimicrobial effectiveness, but also to its acceptability by hospital staff.We aimed to assess skin tolerance and antimicrobial effects of two widely accepted hand hygiene measures under in-use conditions.Fifty-two nurses were randomly assigned for an 8-day period to either an alcohol-based disinfectant or a hand wash with a non-antiseptic soap. At baseline and at the end of the test period, microbiological hand samples were obtained both before and after a hand hygiene procedure, and skin tolerance was assessed using clinical scores and measurement of transepidermal water loss.Self-assessment of skin condition and grade of skin damage worsened significantly more in the group using soap than in the group using alcoholic disinfectant (P = 0.004 and P = 0.01, respectively). The alcohol-based rinse was significantly more effective than liquid soap in removing transient contaminant micro-organisms (P = 0.016). Twenty of 50 hand washes with non-antiseptic soap apparently resulted in bacterial contamination of the hands. At the end of the study, the total bacterial count increased with the increasing number of hand washes in the soap group (P = 0.003), and with the degree of skin damage (P = 0.005) in the antiseptic group.In everyday hospital practice, alcohol-based disinfectant is more effective and better tolerated than non-antiseptic soap; soap is at risk of spreading contamination; and skin comfort strongly influences the number and the quality of hand hygiene procedures.