Subjective benefit of inhaled therapies in patients with bronchiectasis: a questionnaire study.The objectives of this study were to obtain information about the use and subjective benefits of inhaled therapies in patients with bronchiectasis and to determine if these benefits were related to the presence of airflow obstruction. One hundred and twenty patients completed a questionnaire on inhaled therapies and performed spirometry. Inhalers were used daily by 85/120 patients with bronchiectasis and 42/120 patients had a nebuliser. Inhaled therapies were used extensively in patients with (FEV1 < 80%) and without (FEV1 > 80%) evidence of airflow obstruction. The majority of patients reported subjective benefits from their inhaled therapies. Chi2 analysis showed that there was no association between perceived benefits of short acting bronchodilators (SAB), long acting bronchodilators (LAB), corticosteroids or nebulisers and degree of airflow obstruction. This study provides information about the subjective benefits of inhaled therapies which could facilitate a more comprehensive assessment of the net benefit of inhaled therapies in patients with bronchiectasis with and without airflow obstruction.Inhaled fluticasone in bronchiectasis: a 12 month study.The clinical efficacy of inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) treatment has not been evaluated in bronchiectasis, despite the presence of chronic airway inflammation.After three consecutive weekly visits, 86 patients were randomised to receive either fluticasone 500 mug twice daily (n = 43, 23F, mean (SD) age 57.7 (14.4) years) or matched placebo (n = 43, 34F, 59.2 (14.2) years) and reviewed regularly for 52 weeks in a double blind fashion.35 and 38 patients in the fluticasone and placebo groups completed the study. Significantly more patients on ICS than on placebo showed improvement in 24 hour sputum volume (OR 2.5, 95% CI 1.1 to 6.0, p = 0.03) but not in exacerbation frequency, forced expiratory volume in 1 second, forced vital capacity, or sputum purulence score. Significantly more patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection receiving fluticasone showed improvement in 24 hour sputum volume (OR 13.5, 95% CI 1.8 to 100.2, p = 0.03) and exacerbation frequency (OR 13.3, 95% CI 1.8 to 100.2, p = 0.01) than those given placebo. Logistic regression models revealed a significantly better response in sputum volume with fluticasone treatment than with placebo among subgroups of patients with 24 hour sputum volume <30 ml (p = 0.04), exacerbation frequency </=2/year (p = 0.04), and sputum purulence score >5 (p = 0.03).ICS treatment is beneficial to patients with bronchiectasis, particularly those with P. aerurginosa infection.Withdrawal of inhaled steroids in children with non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.To study the effects of inhaled steroid withdrawal on bronchial hyperreactivity, sputum inflammatory markers and neutrophilic apoptosis in children with non-cystic fibrosis (non-CF) bronchiectasis.To evaluate the role of inhaled steroids in the treatment of children with non-CF bronchiectasis with specific emphasis on the bronchial hyperreactivity and neutrophilic apoptosis.Twenty-seven children with steady-state non-CF bronchiectasis were evaluated primarily with metacholine challenge tests and apoptotic neutrophil ratios in induced sputum and secondarily with symptom scores, pulmonary function tests and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-8 (IL-8) levels and neutrophil ratios in induced sputum before and after 12-week withdrawal of inhaled steroids.There were 16 girls and 11 boys. Median (interquartile range) age was 11.4 (9.5-13.6) years, follow-up duration was 3.5 (2-6.5) years. Symptom scores (4 vs. 3; P = 0.27), oxygen saturation (95% vs. 97%; P = 0.06), pulmonary function tests (FEV1: 82% predicted vs. 83% predicted; P = 0.73), sputum neutrophil ratios (29.9% vs. 46.8%; P = 0.20), TNF-alpha (58 pg/mL vs. 44.5 pg/mL; P = 0.55) and IL-8 (2.7 ng/mL vs. 2.4 ng/mL; P = 0.82) levels in induced sputum were similar before and after 12-week withdrawal of inhaled steroids. However, the number of patients with bronchial hyperreactivity increased (37% vs. 63% of patients; P = 0.016) and neutrophilic apoptosis in induced sputum decreased (42.8% vs. 20.2%; P = 0.03) after withdrawal.In this study, 12 week-withdrawal of inhaled steroid treatment resulted in a significant increase in bronchial hyperreactivity and decrease in neutrophil apoptosis, but no change in sputum inflammatory markers in children with non-CF bronchiectasis was observed.Inhaled fluticasone reduces sputum inflammatory indices in severe bronchiectasis.Although corticosteroid therapy might be clinically beneficial for bronchiectasis, very little is known of its effects on the inflammatory and infective markers in bronchiectasis. We have therefore performed a double-blind, placebo-controlled study to evaluate the effects of a 4-wk administration of inhaled fluticasone in bronchiectasis. Twenty-four patients (12 female; mean age 51 yr) were randomized into receiving either inhaled fluticasone (500 microgram twice daily) via the Accuhaler device (n = 12) or placebo. At each visit, spirometry, 24-h sputum volume, sputum leukocyte density, bacterial densities, and concentrations of interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-8, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and leukotriene B4 (LTB4) were determined. There was a significant (p < 0.05) decrease in sputum leukocyte density and IL-1beta, IL-8, and LTB4 after fluticasone treatment. The fluticasone group had one and the placebo group three episodes of exacerbation. There were no significant changes in spirometry (p > 0.05) or any reported adverse reactions in either group. The results of this study show that high-dose fluticasone is effective in reducing the sputum inflammatory indices in bronchiectasis. Large-scale and long-term studies are indicated to evaluate the effects of inhaled steroid therapy on the inflammatory components in bronchiectasis.Inhaled steroids in patients with bronchiectasis.The effect of inhaled beclomethasone diproprionate (1500 micrograms day-1) on symptoms, pulmonary function and sputum production was examined in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study in 20 patients with bronchiectasis. An 18% reduction in daily sputum production (P less than 0.003) was observed on treatment with inhaled steroid compared to placebo. A small, significant, improvement in morning peak expiratory flow rate (P less than 0.03) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (P less than 0.03) was seen but the absolute changes are unlikely to be of clinical importance. Symptom scores for cough improved significantly (P less than 0.02). Inhaled steroids may have a role in the management of bronchiectasis by reducing cough and sputum production.Clinical efficacy and safety of budesonide-formoterol in non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of medium-dose formoterol-budesonide combined inhaled treatment in a single inhaler compared with high-dose budesonide treatment in patients with non-cystic fibrosis (non-CF) bronchiectasis.This is a 12-month randomized, double-blind, parallel-groups clinical trial, to run in 40 patients with non-CF bronchiectasis diagnosed by high-resolution CT scan of the chest, receiving formoterol-budesonide combined treatment (18/640 μg daily) or budesonide treatment (1,600 μg daily). Variables concerning clinical condition, health-related quality of life (HRQL), lung function, β(2)-adrenergic agonist use, potentially pathogenic microorganism (PPM) isolates, and medication side effects were analyzed by intention-to-treat analysis.The study group receiving a formoterol-budesonide combined treatment showed a significant improvement, both clinically and statistically, of symptoms (dyspnea, number of coughs, and rescue β(2)-adrenergic agonist-free days). Furthermore, we observed an HRQL improvement, with no changes in functional parameters or in PPM isolates, together with an important reduction in overall side effects, especially for those related to inhaled steroids, compared with the high-dose budesonide treatment group.Inhaled medium-dose formoterol-budesonide combined treatment in a single inhaler is more effective and safe compared with high-dose budesonide treatment in patients with non-CF bronchiectasis.ClinicalTrials.gov; No.: NCT00728715; URL: www.clinicaltrials.gov.Budesonide efficacy and safety in patients with bronchiectasis not due to cystic fibrosis.The therapeutic benefit of inhaled corticoids in bronchiectasis not due to cystic fibrosis is still not well documented. The aim of the present study was to assess the efficacy and safety of inhaled corticoids in this disease.This study was conducted at a tertiary university hospital in the city of Barcelona, Catalonia, (Spain).A prospective, double-blind, parallel, placebo-masked study was conducted. Seventy-seven patients (40 women; mean age: 68 years) were randomly assigned to receive either 400 mcg budesonide twice daily or placebo and were regularly reviewed for six months.Differences in forced vital capacity and forced expiratory volume in the first second between the beginning and end of the study were not significantly lower in the budesonide group than in the placebo group, either in absolute values [-17.4 (386.9) versus -21.4 (375.5)] or in percentages [-1.9(9.5) versus -2.8 (11.6)]. Microbiological criteria applied to evaluate changes between the beginning and end of the study showed no worsening in the budesonide group compared with the control group, whereas a non-significant improvement was obtained in 8.1 % of cases in the budesonide group compared to 3 % in the placebo group. Although significance was only achieved for sputum eosinophils (p = 0.021), a consistent tendency towards improvement was also observed in secondary end-points (symptoms, number and duration of exacerbations, quality of life, sputum cytology and interleukin-8) in the budesonide group.Although further studies are required, inhaled corticoid treatment may be efficacious and safe in bronchiectasis not due to cystic fibrosis.Exhaled nitric oxide in bronchiectasis: the effects of inhaled corticosteroid therapy.While exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) levels are reduced by inhaled corticosteroid therapy in asthma, such treatment effect is unclear in bronchiectasis.Stable non-smoking bronchiectasis patients were randomised to receive either fluticasone (1 mg/daily) or identical placebo via the Accuhaler device.Sixty non-smoking patients (38 women; mean age 56.4 +/- 12.7 years) were recruited. Of these, half received inhaled fluticasone and half placebo therapy. eNO was measured using a chemiluminescence analyser at 0, 4, 12, 24, 36 and 52 weeks. There was no significant difference in eNO levels between fluticasone and placebo patients over the study period. There was no correlation between baseline eNO with age, FEV1, FVC, 24 h sputum volume or number of bronchiectatic segments. Patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA) infection, but not their counterparts, displayed a correlation between 0- and 52-week eNO levels. PA infection was associated with significantly lower eNO levels among the patients.Inhaled fluticasone therapy, despite being an effective anti-inflammatory agent, has no significant effect on eNO production, either at individual time points or over the entire 52-week profile, in bronchiectasis. It appears that eNO might not reflect the extent of airway inflammation in bronchiectasis.Inhaled steroids improve quality of life in patients with steady-state bronchiectasis.The effects of inhaled steroids upon the quality of life of patients with bronchiectasis remain unknown.To analyze the effect of inhaled fluticasone propionate (FP) for 6 months upon the clinical, functional, microbiological and outcome parameters of patients with steady-state bronchiectasis not due to cystic fibrosis, and its repercussions for patient health-related quality of life (HRQoL).Prospective, randomized, double-blind (for effective doses) study.The diagnosis of bronchiectasis was made by high-resolution computed tomography. Ninety-three patients (mean age: 68.5 [8.4]) were randomized to receive 250 microg bid, 500 microg bid or no treatment with inhaled FP for 6 months. Data were collected at baseline and at 1, 3 and 6 months after the start of treatment. HRQoL was assessed using the validated Spanish version of the St. George's Respiratory Questionnaire.The group administered FP 1000 microg daily showed significant improvement in dyspnea (1.03 [2.1]-1.24 [2.2] points; P = 0.01-0.04), sputum production (P = 0.001), days without cough (P = 0.02) and short-acting beta-2 agonists used (P = 0.01) from the first month of treatment, with no changes in pulmonary function, number or severity of exacerbations, or microbiological profile of the sputum. As a result, an improvement in HRQoL was seen in this group after 3 months of treatment (45.4 [14.2] vs. 40.5 [13.9]; P = 0.01).Inhalatory FP 500 microg bid is effective from the first month of treatment for controlling the symptoms of patients with steady-state bronchiectasis-thus ensuring a significant improvement in HRQoL.