Application of magnetic resonance angiography to neurosurgical practice: a critical review of 150 cases.The potential role of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in clinical neurosurgical practice was evaluated in 150 consecutive patients in an attempt to define clinical situations in which it aided in diagnosis, helped guide treatment options, and/or possibly eliminated the need for conventional catheter angiography. Among patients with nonvascular pathology (n = 42), MRA provided useful clinical information in 55% of cases, and could have effectively replaced catheter angiography in 76% of cases. In this group of patients, MRA provided excellent depiction of tumour and vessel relationships, and in conjunction with conventional imaging modalities reliably ruled out the question of tumour versus aneurysm whenever that question was raised. Among patients with vascular lesions (n = 108), MRA visualized the lesion in 18 of 20 (90%) aneurysms, 11 of 11 (100%) vascular malformations, 31 or 31 (100%) cases with known occlusive vascular disease, and reliably excluded occlusive vascular disease in 19 of 30 (63%) cases. The MRA potentially could have replaced conventional catheter angiography in less than 8% of cases with vascular pathology treated surgically, and in 76% of cases with vascular pathology treated medically or expectantly. Imaging time was relatively short, 10 to 20 minutes for intracranial vessels and 6.5 to 13 minutes for extracranial vessels. Shortcomings included the lack of spacial resolution required for surgical planning and the possible misleading information in the settings of low flow and partial thrombosis. It is concluded that currently available MRA modalities contribute useful information in a wide spectrum of neurosurgical clinical situations including screening and serial follow-up.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)Emergency noninvasive angiography for acute intracerebral hemorrhage.Spontaneous ICH is a devastating condition and is associated with significant mortality in the acute phase due to ongoing hemorrhage and hematoma expansion. A growing body of evidence suggests that there may be considerable utility in performing noninvasive vascular imaging during the acute-to-early phase of ICH. CTA has become widely available and is sensitive and specific for detecting vascular causes of secondary ICH such as aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, dural arteriovenous fistulas, intracranial dissections, and neoplasm. CT venography can also diagnose dural sinus thrombosis presenting as hemorrhagic infarction. Recent data from stroke populations demonstrate a relatively low risk to patients when contrast is administered in the absence of a known serum creatinine. Detection of acute contrast extravasation within the hematoma ("spot sign") with CT angiography is predictive of subsequent hematoma expansion and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Risk stratification based on acute CTA can inform and expedite decision-making regarding intensive care unit admission, blood pressure control, correction of coagulopathy, and neurosurgical consultation. Noninvasive vascular imaging should be considered as an important component of the initial diagnostic work-up for patients presenting with acute ICH.Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography.Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography is a powerful tool for the evaluation of cervical and intracranial vasculature. Both noncontrast and contrast-enhanced MR angiography can provide exquisite vascular contrast and detail without the use of ionizing radiation. More advanced techniques such as time-resolved MR angiography and parallel imaging provide dynamic information in rapid fashion. This article describes the basic principles and techniques of MR angiography image acquisition.Comparison of MRI, CT and angiography in cerebral arteriovenous malformations.Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebral angiography were performed in 30 patients with cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Clinical data and radiographic findings are presented. The diagnostic values of CT and MRI are compared. 25 of 30 AVMs were seen on CT-scans, 27 on MR-images, 26 by angiography. Typical CT-findings were irregularly hyperdense areas with spotlike contrast enhancement. 4 out of 5 AVMs not depicted by CT were diagnosed for tumor, in one case the malformation was hidden by a hematoma. MRI mostly showed the AVM as round or oval lesions with spongelike structure of low signal intensity in T1-weighted sequences or as single enlarged vessels. The 26 AVM revealed by angiography presented typically enlarged vessels; in 2 cases angiography was without any pathological findings, 2 cases showed signs of a space occupying lesion. The results confirm that MRI is superior to CT in detecting and recognizing AVM. Its strength lies in the possibility to detect abnormal vessels even in presence of fresh or older hematoma, and in the precise information on size and location of the AVM. In our series, MRI and CT-scans together showed 28 of 30 AVMs, the remaining 2 cases were not seen with angiography either but only proven histologically. Although today MR-angiography is able to provide three dimensional images of blood vessels, it cannot yet replace angiography in the exact study of the vessels which is required for surgical planning.CT angiography versus MR angiography in the evaluation of acute neurovascular disease.Vascular imaging adds value in investigation of basal ganglia hemorrhage.The risk of basal ganglia hemorrhage (BGH) increases in patients of older age and with hypertension. Current guidelines do not recommend routine vascular imaging. However, a proportion of patients with BGH have underlying vascular abnormalities, and these patients may require a different treatment approach. We aimed to assess the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. In this retrospective study, we included all patients who presented with BGH between January 2007 and December 2009 at a single institution. The following data were collected: patient demographics, vascular risk factors, medications, volume of hematoma, CT scans, CT angiogram, magnetic resonance angiography and digital subtraction angiography. We determined the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities and correlated these findings with risk factors for BGH. A total of 113 consecutive patients with BGH were identified, and vascular imaging was performed in 61. The median age was 62 years and 48 (78.7%) of these patients were male. Forty-two (68.9%) of 61 patients had hypertension. Positive vascular imaging findings were identified in eight of 61 patients (13.1%): three intracranial aneurysms, three cavernous malformations, one Moyamoya disease and one arteriovenous malformation. There were no significant associations between demographic features, vascular risk factors and the hematoma volume between patients with positive and negative vascular imaging. Specifically, an underlying vascular abnormality was not associated with age (≥ 60 years, 6/36 patients had an underlying vascular abnormality, compared with 2/25 patients< 60 years; p=not significant [n.s.]). There was no relationship with hypertension (5/42 hypertensive patients and 3/19 normotensive patients (n.s.) had an underlying vascular abnormality). We concluded that there is a significant proportion of relevant underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. This likelihood is not predicted by risk factors such as hypertension and age. These findings indicate the importance of vascular imaging in patients with BGH who are not neurologically devastated.Our own experience with CT angiography in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations.Computed tomography (CT) and intraarterial cerebral angiography are essential methods in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. In recent years however non-invasive or minimally invasive methods like MR angiography and CT angiography (CTA), which could potentially replace angiography, have been developed. The aim of presented study is to demonstrate our own experience in application of CTA in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. The material consists of 86 CTA examinations performed shortly after non-traumatic intracranial haemorrhage. Angiographic correlation has been available in 23 patients and surgical one--in 31 cases. CTA studies began with serio-CT to select the optimal time between contrast injection and CT scanning. After that 100-120 ml of non-ionic contrast medium was injected intravenously (5 ml per sec.) and spiral CT acqusition was performed with the delay calculated on the basis of the serio-CT. The obtained images were postprocessed on the workstation using always MIP and in many cases also SSD and VRT reconstructions. Vascular malformations have been diagnosed in 44 of 86 CTA studies including 38 patients with aneurysms (total number 51) and 6 patients with AVMs. In 17 cases the diameter of the aneurysm did not exceed 5 mm. In all surgical cases the CTA diagnosis of the aneurysm has been confirmed. There was however one false-negative case. On the other hand in 7 patients CTA revealed the small aneurysm, despite unclear angiographic appearance. In 2 of 6 patients with CTA suspicion of AVM this diagnosis has been excluded either by angiography or surgery. Comparison of CTA and angiography in 22 aneurysms showed in 17 cases superiority of CTA in evaluation of aneurysmal neck and the relationship between aneurysm and adjacent vessels (especially with VRT and SSD reconstructions). In patients with AVMs however the evaluation of supplying and draining vessels was better with angiography. On the base of our material we can conclude that CTA is very efficient in detecting and evaluating the aneurysms. We believe that CTA can replace angiography if it reveals aneurysm in a site corresponding with location of haemorrhage on CT. In patients with suspicion of AVM value of CTA is doubtful and angiography remains the method of choice.Efficiency of CT-angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms.CT-angiography is a non-invasive method, alternative to cerebral angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms. The aim of the study was the assessment of the efficiency of CT-angiography in a large material, which has been mostly verified with angiography and/or surgery.CT-angiography was performed in 196 patients with intracranial bleeding. Seventy-three (73) patients underwent also cerebral angiography (CA), 121 were operated on, 74 of them solely on the basis of CT-angiography. A spiral CT scanning (2 mm slices, 1-1.5 pitch, 1 mm-gap reconstruction) combined with an injection of 120 mL of contrast medium (5 mL/sec) was used. Subsequently three-dimensional MIP reconstructions were received, supplemented in some cases with SSD, VRT and MPR.CT-angiography revealed 128 aneurysms in 106 patients, located mostly in anterior communicating, middle cerebral and internal carotid arteries. The size of most aneurysms was 6-10 mm, but nearly one-third of them did not exceed 5 mm. In the group of patients who underwent CA, there was only 1 false negative CT-angiography result, while in 7 patients CT-angiography allowed for the diagnosis of small aneurysms which were not clearly visible on CA. CT-angiography was superior to CA in assessment of aneurysm morphology by 3 independent radiologists in 17 out of 22 cases. CT-angiography findings were confirmed during surgery in all 74 patients.CT-angiography is highly effective in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms and the evaluation of their morphology. In our opinion, in most cases, CT-angiography is precise enough to plan a surgical or endovascular procedure.A rule to identify patients who require magnetic resonance imaging after intracerebral hemorrhage.A study performed in Hong Kong of catheter angiography after ICH found a high rate of structural lesions in patients 45 years of age or younger, without a history of hypertension, or with lobar hemorrhage. We hypothesized that a clinical decision rule based on these Hong Kong criteria would reliably identify patients who require MRI after ICH.We identified all patients admitted with ICH to our medical center during a 5-year period who underwent brain MRI. Patients were excluded if the history revealed an obvious cause of ICH. Two study neurologists independently adjudicated whether MRI revealed the cause of ICH. We devised a rule recommending MRI if patients met one or more Hong Kong criteria, and calculated the proportion of patients with diagnostic MRI studies who would have been identified by this rule. We also examined the performance of a modified rule using age ≤ 55 years.The original Hong Kong rule applied to 102 of the 148 patients in our cohort (69%), and would have recommended MRI in 25 of 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (93%, 95% CI 76-99%). The modified rule applied to 110 patients (74%), and would have recommended MRI in all 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (100%, 95% CI 91-100%).A rule based on simple clinical criteria may be useful for stratifying the yield of MRI after ICH. If validated in further studies, such a rule could reduce the number of unnecessary MRI studies after ICH, leading to more cost-effective care.First-line investigation of acute intracerebral hemorrhage using dynamic magnetic resonance angiography.To report the initial experience of magnetic resonance (MR) digital subtraction angiography (MR-DSA) in the dynamic assessment of the cerebral circulation in acute non-traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Twelve patients with acute ICH were investigated within 6 days of the ictus using a dynamic contrast-enhanced 2-D MR angiogram that produces subtracted images with a temporal resolution of 1-2 frame/s. The MR-DSA examinations were assessed for evidence of an intracranial vascular abnormality and were compared with (i) the routine MR sequences, (ii) non-dynamic time-of-flight MR angiography, and (iii) catheter angiogram performed during the same admission.All 12 MR-DSA examinations were considered to be technically satisfactory. MR-DSA detected an intracranial vascular abnormality in 7 patients (3 arteriovenous malformations, 2 aneurysms, 1 dural arteriovenous fistula, and 1 venous thrombosis). All abnormalities were confirmed by catheter angiography with the exception of one patient with venous sinus thrombosis found on MR imaging that did not undergo catheter angiography. All four arteriovenous shunts were detected by MR-DSA by virtue of early venous filling.MR-DSA can be performed satisfactorily in the setting of acute ICH and provides an alternative method to catheter angiography for identifying shunting vascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and fistulae, as well as large aneurysms and venous occlusions. MR-DSA is a contrast-medium-based technique that does not suffer from the T1 shortening effects of acute hemorrhage that can obscure abnormalities on conventional flow-based non-dynamic techniques.Detection of intracranial aneurysms with multislice CT: comparison with conventional angiography.We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of multislice CT in detection of intracranial aneurysms in patients presenting with subarachnoid or intracranial haemorrhage. Multislice CT and multiplanar digital subtraction angiography (DSA) images were obtained in 50 consecutive patients presenting with subarachnoid (SAH) and/or intracranial haemorrhage and reviewed by three neuroradiologists for the number, size and site of any aneurysms. The CT data were assessed using multiplanar reformats (MPR), maximum-intensity projections (MIP), surface-shaded display (SSD) and volume-rendering (VRT). In conventional angiography 51 aneurysms were detected in 41 patients. CT angiography (CTA) showed up to 48 aneurysms in 39 patients, depending on the observer. The overall sensitivity of multislice CT was 83.3% for small (< 4 mm), 90.6% for medium-size (5-12 mm) and 100% for large (> 13 mm) aneurysms. The sensitivity of multislice CTA to medium-size and large intracranial aneurysm is within the upper part of the range reported for helical single-slice CT. However, as small aneurysms may not be found, DSA remains the standard technique for investigation of SAH.Comparison of MR angiography and conventional angiography in the investigation of intracranial arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms in children.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is an attractive alternative to conventional catheter angiography (CCA) in children, especially for the detection of intracranial arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) or aneurysms in the out-of-hours setting, because it has fewer risks and complications. OBJECTIVE. To compare MRA with CCA for the detection of intracranial AVMs, aneurysms and arterial anatomy in children.Retrospective blinded review of MRAs and CCAs by two independent paediatric radiologists, in a group of 19 children already diagnosed with AVMs, aneurysms and subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) and who had undergone both imaging techniques.Abnormalities were identified on MRA in 15 of 19 patients and by CCA in 11 of 19 patients. MRA showed one aneurysm, nine AVMs, three haemorrhages and two indeterminate lesions. CCA showed nine AVMs and two indeterminate lesions. The two modalities showed excellent correlation in the detection of AVMs in nine patients. Vascular supply to the AVMs correlated well in four cases. There was complete disagreement in the determination of vessel supply in one case, and in two cases CCA showed additional vessel supply compared to MRA, while in two further cases MRA showed an additional vessel supply compared to CCA. CCA was superior to MRA in demonstrating arterial anatomy, except with regard to the anterior and posterior communicating arteries where MRA was superior.The high sensitivity of MRA in the detection of AVMs when compared to CCA and the low incidence of aneurysms support the use of MRA as the initial imaging modality when intracranial haemorrhage is diagnosed on CT, especially in the out-of-hours setting.Vascular disorders--magnetic resonance angiography: brain vessels.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain obtained at 3 T imaging has made a significant clinical impact. MRA benefits from acquisition at higher magnetic field strength because of higher available signal-to-noise ratio and improved relative background suppression due to magnetic field strength-related T1 lengthening. Parallel imaging techniques are ideally suited for high-field MRA. Many of the developments that have made 3 T MRA of the brain successful can be regarded as enabling technologies that are essential for further development of 7 T MRA, which brings additional challenges.Early elective surgical exploration of spontaneous intracerebral hematomas of unknown origin.The management of non-life threatening spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage with no obvious medical etiology in patients and the lack of findings on images has not been clearly defined. In general, the current practice is to treat these patients conservatively and repeat studies to rule out a treatable cause 6 weeks to 3 months later; more often than not these repeated studies fail to reveal any findings, and the patient is treated conservatively. For years, the senior author (R.C.H.) has treated these patients with early surgical exploration. This study was undertaken prospectively to ascertain the frequency of positive findings during surgical exploration.Between 2000 and 2007, the authors prospectively collected data from 9 cases (4 cerebellar, 4 lobar, and 1 caudate head) of unexplained intraparenchymal hemorrhages. The patient age ranged from 18 to 45 years (mean 31.2 years). All patients were normotensive, had no underlying medical problems explaining such a hemorrhage, and failed to exhibit findings on cerebral angiograms. Magnetic resonance images with contrast showed no abnormal vasculature or enhancement. Eight patients underwent elective surgical exploration in the subacute stage, and urgent decompression of the clot was necessary in 1.In 7 (77.8%) of the 9 cases, histopathological examination revealed a cause for the hemorrhage (3 "cryptic" arteriovenous malformations, 3 cavernomas, and 1 neoplasm). A good outcome was achieved in all 8 patients who underwent elective surgery.The authors recommend elective surgical exploration of intracerebral hematomas of unknown etiology provided that the hematoma is surgically accessible and the patient is relatively young and healthy. Early exploration and resection can provide a cure and eliminate the risk of rebleeding when a vascular lesion is found or guide further treatment in cases of tumor.MR imaging of recent non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage: early experience at 3 T.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using 3.0 T scanners in the clinical environment is in its infancy and is only available at a limited number of sites worldwide. There is great interest amongst radiologists about the perceived benefits of clinical imaging at 3.0 T; however, it remains to be seen whether the theoretical advantages will bring real gains. MRI in patients with non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is difficult, yet, these patients benefit from non-invasive angiography. Conventional catheter angiography (CCA) remains the reference standard for excluding/confirming the presence of intracranial vascular abnormalities, but MR angiography at 3.0 T may offer opportunities for significant changes in patient management. We present our experiences of using 3.0 T MR angiography in 27 patients with acute or early subacute ICH.Application of magnetic resonance angiography to neurosurgical practice: a critical review of 150 cases.The potential role of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in clinical neurosurgical practice was evaluated in 150 consecutive patients in an attempt to define clinical situations in which it aided in diagnosis, helped guide treatment options, and/or possibly eliminated the need for conventional catheter angiography. Among patients with nonvascular pathology (n = 42), MRA provided useful clinical information in 55% of cases, and could have effectively replaced catheter angiography in 76% of cases. In this group of patients, MRA provided excellent depiction of tumour and vessel relationships, and in conjunction with conventional imaging modalities reliably ruled out the question of tumour versus aneurysm whenever that question was raised. Among patients with vascular lesions (n = 108), MRA visualized the lesion in 18 of 20 (90%) aneurysms, 11 of 11 (100%) vascular malformations, 31 or 31 (100%) cases with known occlusive vascular disease, and reliably excluded occlusive vascular disease in 19 of 30 (63%) cases. The MRA potentially could have replaced conventional catheter angiography in less than 8% of cases with vascular pathology treated surgically, and in 76% of cases with vascular pathology treated medically or expectantly. Imaging time was relatively short, 10 to 20 minutes for intracranial vessels and 6.5 to 13 minutes for extracranial vessels. Shortcomings included the lack of spacial resolution required for surgical planning and the possible misleading information in the settings of low flow and partial thrombosis. It is concluded that currently available MRA modalities contribute useful information in a wide spectrum of neurosurgical clinical situations including screening and serial follow-up.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)The value of magnetic resonance imaging for the detection of the bleeding source in non-traumatic intracerebral haemorrhages: a comparison with conventional digital subtraction angiography.Conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is currently regarded as the gold standard in detecting underlying vascular pathologies in patients with intracerebral haemorrhages (ICH). However, the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnostic workup of ICHs has considerably increased in recent years. Our aim was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and yield of MRI for the detection of the underlying aetiology in ICH patients.Sixty-seven consecutive patients with an acute ICH who underwent MRI (including magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and DSA during their diagnostic workup) were included in the study. Magnetic resonance images were retrospectively analysed by two independent neuroradiologists to determine the localisation and cause of the ICH. DSA was used as a reference standard.In seven patients (10.4%), a DSA-positive vascular aetiology was present (one aneurysm, four arteriovenous malformations, one dural arteriovenous fistula and one vasculitis). All of these cases were correctly diagnosed by both readers on MRI. In addition, MRI revealed the following probable bleeding causes in 39 of the 60 DSA-negative patients: cerebral amyloid angiopathy (17), cavernoma (9), arterial hypertension (8), haemorrhagic transformation of an ischaemic infarction (3) and malignant brain tumour with secondary ICH (2).Performing MRI with MRA proved to be an accurate diagnostic tool in detecting vascular malformations in patients with ICH. In addition, MRI provided valuable information regarding DSA-negative ICH causes, and thus had a high diagnostic yield in ICH patients.Emergency noninvasive angiography for acute intracerebral hemorrhage.Spontaneous ICH is a devastating condition and is associated with significant mortality in the acute phase due to ongoing hemorrhage and hematoma expansion. A growing body of evidence suggests that there may be considerable utility in performing noninvasive vascular imaging during the acute-to-early phase of ICH. CTA has become widely available and is sensitive and specific for detecting vascular causes of secondary ICH such as aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, dural arteriovenous fistulas, intracranial dissections, and neoplasm. CT venography can also diagnose dural sinus thrombosis presenting as hemorrhagic infarction. Recent data from stroke populations demonstrate a relatively low risk to patients when contrast is administered in the absence of a known serum creatinine. Detection of acute contrast extravasation within the hematoma ("spot sign") with CT angiography is predictive of subsequent hematoma expansion and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Risk stratification based on acute CTA can inform and expedite decision-making regarding intensive care unit admission, blood pressure control, correction of coagulopathy, and neurosurgical consultation. Noninvasive vascular imaging should be considered as an important component of the initial diagnostic work-up for patients presenting with acute ICH.Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography.Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography is a powerful tool for the evaluation of cervical and intracranial vasculature. Both noncontrast and contrast-enhanced MR angiography can provide exquisite vascular contrast and detail without the use of ionizing radiation. More advanced techniques such as time-resolved MR angiography and parallel imaging provide dynamic information in rapid fashion. This article describes the basic principles and techniques of MR angiography image acquisition.Three-dimensional computerized tomography angiography in patients with hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage.The authors confirm the usefulness of extravasation detected on three-dimensional computerized tomography (3D-CT) angiography in the diagnosis of continued hemorrhage and establishment of its cause in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Thirty-one patients with acute ICH in whom noncontrast and 3D-CT angiography had been performed within 12 hours of the onset of hemorrhage and in whom conventional cerebral angiographic studies were obtained during the chronic stage were prospectively studied. Noncontrast CT scanning was repeated within 24 hours of the onset of ICH to evaluate hematoma enlargement. Findings indicating extravasation on 3D-CT angiography, including any abnormal area of high density on helical CT scanning, were observed in five patients; three of these demonstrated hematoma enlargement on follow-up CT studies. Thus, specificity was 60% (three correct predictions among five positives) and sensitivity was 100% (19 correct predictions among 19 negatives). Evidence of extravasation on 3D-CT angiography indicates that there is persistent hemorrhage and correlates with enlargement of the hematoma. Regarding the cause of hemorrhage, five cerebral aneurysms were visualized in four patients, and two diagnoses of moyamoya disease and one of unilateral moyamoya phenomenon were made with the aid of 3D-CT angiography. Emergency surgery was performed without conventional angiography in one patient who had an aneurysm, and it was clipped successfully.Overall, 3D-CT angiography was found to be valuable in the diagnosis of the cause of hemorrhage and in the detection of persistent hemorrhage in patients with acute ICH.Comparison of MRI, CT and angiography in cerebral arteriovenous malformations.Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebral angiography were performed in 30 patients with cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Clinical data and radiographic findings are presented. The diagnostic values of CT and MRI are compared. 25 of 30 AVMs were seen on CT-scans, 27 on MR-images, 26 by angiography. Typical CT-findings were irregularly hyperdense areas with spotlike contrast enhancement. 4 out of 5 AVMs not depicted by CT were diagnosed for tumor, in one case the malformation was hidden by a hematoma. MRI mostly showed the AVM as round or oval lesions with spongelike structure of low signal intensity in T1-weighted sequences or as single enlarged vessels. The 26 AVM revealed by angiography presented typically enlarged vessels; in 2 cases angiography was without any pathological findings, 2 cases showed signs of a space occupying lesion. The results confirm that MRI is superior to CT in detecting and recognizing AVM. Its strength lies in the possibility to detect abnormal vessels even in presence of fresh or older hematoma, and in the precise information on size and location of the AVM. In our series, MRI and CT-scans together showed 28 of 30 AVMs, the remaining 2 cases were not seen with angiography either but only proven histologically. Although today MR-angiography is able to provide three dimensional images of blood vessels, it cannot yet replace angiography in the exact study of the vessels which is required for surgical planning.Spontaneous intracranial hematomas: role of dynamic CT and angiography.Forty-five patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) were studied prospectively by dynamic CT and cerebral angiography. The accuracy of dynamic CT in demonstrating the underlying vascular cause in ICH was evaluated. Dynamic CT correctly predicted 90% of aneurysms, 83% of AVMs and 100% of normal studies as compared to angiography. Cerebral angiography can be obviated in patients where dynamic CT does not show any obvious vascular anomaly.CT angiography versus MR angiography in the evaluation of acute neurovascular disease.Vascular imaging adds value in investigation of basal ganglia hemorrhage.The risk of basal ganglia hemorrhage (BGH) increases in patients of older age and with hypertension. Current guidelines do not recommend routine vascular imaging. However, a proportion of patients with BGH have underlying vascular abnormalities, and these patients may require a different treatment approach. We aimed to assess the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. In this retrospective study, we included all patients who presented with BGH between January 2007 and December 2009 at a single institution. The following data were collected: patient demographics, vascular risk factors, medications, volume of hematoma, CT scans, CT angiogram, magnetic resonance angiography and digital subtraction angiography. We determined the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities and correlated these findings with risk factors for BGH. A total of 113 consecutive patients with BGH were identified, and vascular imaging was performed in 61. The median age was 62 years and 48 (78.7%) of these patients were male. Forty-two (68.9%) of 61 patients had hypertension. Positive vascular imaging findings were identified in eight of 61 patients (13.1%): three intracranial aneurysms, three cavernous malformations, one Moyamoya disease and one arteriovenous malformation. There were no significant associations between demographic features, vascular risk factors and the hematoma volume between patients with positive and negative vascular imaging. Specifically, an underlying vascular abnormality was not associated with age (≥ 60 years, 6/36 patients had an underlying vascular abnormality, compared with 2/25 patients< 60 years; p=not significant [n.s.]). There was no relationship with hypertension (5/42 hypertensive patients and 3/19 normotensive patients (n.s.) had an underlying vascular abnormality). We concluded that there is a significant proportion of relevant underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. This likelihood is not predicted by risk factors such as hypertension and age. These findings indicate the importance of vascular imaging in patients with BGH who are not neurologically devastated.Comparisons of DSA and MR angiography with digital subtraction angiography in 151 patients with subacute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.To exclude underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage, the traditional paradigm requires investigation using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in both the acute and subacute phases. We investigated whether MRI and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), in the subacute stage of intracerebral hematoma, had high positive predictive values (PPV) and negative predictive values (NPV) in screening for vascular abnormality in the routine clinical setting. In a regional neurosurgical center in Hong Kong, we retrospectively reviewed 151 patients investigated with both MRI and DSA for underlying structural vascular abnormalities during the subacute phase. Sensitivity, specificity, and intermodality agreement were assessed. A total of 70/151 (46%) vascular lesions accountable for the hemorrhage were found. Patients with vascular abnormalities tended to be younger (mean age+/-standard deviation [SD], 33+/-15years), less likely to be hypertensive (6.3%), and the lesion was more likely to be accompanied by intraventricular hemorrhage (22%). In terms of cerebral arteriovenous malformation and dural arteriovenous fistulas, MRI/MRA had a PPV of 0.98 and a NPV of 1.00. We concluded that MRI/MRA was able to detect most structural vascular abnormalities in the subacute phase in most patients and, thus, its use is recommended as the screening test.Our own experience with CT angiography in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations.Computed tomography (CT) and intraarterial cerebral angiography are essential methods in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. In recent years however non-invasive or minimally invasive methods like MR angiography and CT angiography (CTA), which could potentially replace angiography, have been developed. The aim of presented study is to demonstrate our own experience in application of CTA in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. The material consists of 86 CTA examinations performed shortly after non-traumatic intracranial haemorrhage. Angiographic correlation has been available in 23 patients and surgical one--in 31 cases. CTA studies began with serio-CT to select the optimal time between contrast injection and CT scanning. After that 100-120 ml of non-ionic contrast medium was injected intravenously (5 ml per sec.) and spiral CT acqusition was performed with the delay calculated on the basis of the serio-CT. The obtained images were postprocessed on the workstation using always MIP and in many cases also SSD and VRT reconstructions. Vascular malformations have been diagnosed in 44 of 86 CTA studies including 38 patients with aneurysms (total number 51) and 6 patients with AVMs. In 17 cases the diameter of the aneurysm did not exceed 5 mm. In all surgical cases the CTA diagnosis of the aneurysm has been confirmed. There was however one false-negative case. On the other hand in 7 patients CTA revealed the small aneurysm, despite unclear angiographic appearance. In 2 of 6 patients with CTA suspicion of AVM this diagnosis has been excluded either by angiography or surgery. Comparison of CTA and angiography in 22 aneurysms showed in 17 cases superiority of CTA in evaluation of aneurysmal neck and the relationship between aneurysm and adjacent vessels (especially with VRT and SSD reconstructions). In patients with AVMs however the evaluation of supplying and draining vessels was better with angiography. On the base of our material we can conclude that CTA is very efficient in detecting and evaluating the aneurysms. We believe that CTA can replace angiography if it reveals aneurysm in a site corresponding with location of haemorrhage on CT. In patients with suspicion of AVM value of CTA is doubtful and angiography remains the method of choice.Efficiency of CT-angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms.CT-angiography is a non-invasive method, alternative to cerebral angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms. The aim of the study was the assessment of the efficiency of CT-angiography in a large material, which has been mostly verified with angiography and/or surgery.CT-angiography was performed in 196 patients with intracranial bleeding. Seventy-three (73) patients underwent also cerebral angiography (CA), 121 were operated on, 74 of them solely on the basis of CT-angiography. A spiral CT scanning (2 mm slices, 1-1.5 pitch, 1 mm-gap reconstruction) combined with an injection of 120 mL of contrast medium (5 mL/sec) was used. Subsequently three-dimensional MIP reconstructions were received, supplemented in some cases with SSD, VRT and MPR.CT-angiography revealed 128 aneurysms in 106 patients, located mostly in anterior communicating, middle cerebral and internal carotid arteries. The size of most aneurysms was 6-10 mm, but nearly one-third of them did not exceed 5 mm. In the group of patients who underwent CA, there was only 1 false negative CT-angiography result, while in 7 patients CT-angiography allowed for the diagnosis of small aneurysms which were not clearly visible on CA. CT-angiography was superior to CA in assessment of aneurysm morphology by 3 independent radiologists in 17 out of 22 cases. CT-angiography findings were confirmed during surgery in all 74 patients.CT-angiography is highly effective in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms and the evaluation of their morphology. In our opinion, in most cases, CT-angiography is precise enough to plan a surgical or endovascular procedure.Comparison of CTA to DSA in determining the etiology of spontaneous ICH.To compare the efficacy of computed tomographic angiography (CTA) to that of digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in the detection of secondary causes of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Between January 2001 and February 2007 there were 286 patients that had both CTA and DSA for intracranial hemorrhage of all types. Those with primarily subarachnoid hemorrhage or recent trauma were excluded. Fifty-five patients formed the study cohort. Three reviewers independently analyzed the CTAs in a blinded protocol and classified them based on presence or absence of a secondary etiology. Results were compared with the reference standard DSA and kappa values determined for interobserver variability.The overall sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy of CTA were 89%, 92%, 91%, 91% and 91%, respectively. Kappa value for interobserver agreement ranged from 0.78 to 0.89. Two of four dural arteriovenous fistulas (dAVF) were missed on CTA by all three reviewers.CTA is nearly as effective as DSA at determining the cause of secondary intracerebral hemorrhage, but with a lower sensitivity for dAVFs. This supports the use of CTA as the first screening test in patients presenting with spontaneous ICH.A rule to identify patients who require magnetic resonance imaging after intracerebral hemorrhage.A study performed in Hong Kong of catheter angiography after ICH found a high rate of structural lesions in patients 45 years of age or younger, without a history of hypertension, or with lobar hemorrhage. We hypothesized that a clinical decision rule based on these Hong Kong criteria would reliably identify patients who require MRI after ICH.We identified all patients admitted with ICH to our medical center during a 5-year period who underwent brain MRI. Patients were excluded if the history revealed an obvious cause of ICH. Two study neurologists independently adjudicated whether MRI revealed the cause of ICH. We devised a rule recommending MRI if patients met one or more Hong Kong criteria, and calculated the proportion of patients with diagnostic MRI studies who would have been identified by this rule. We also examined the performance of a modified rule using age ≤ 55 years.The original Hong Kong rule applied to 102 of the 148 patients in our cohort (69%), and would have recommended MRI in 25 of 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (93%, 95% CI 76-99%). The modified rule applied to 110 patients (74%), and would have recommended MRI in all 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (100%, 95% CI 91-100%).A rule based on simple clinical criteria may be useful for stratifying the yield of MRI after ICH. If validated in further studies, such a rule could reduce the number of unnecessary MRI studies after ICH, leading to more cost-effective care.Diagnostic accuracy and yield of multidetector CT angiography in the evaluation of spontaneous intraparenchymal cerebral hemorrhage.Multidetector CT angiography (MDCTA) is emerging as the favored initial diagnostic examination in the evaluation of patients presenting with spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage (IPH). This study aims to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and yield of MDCTA for the detection of vascular etiologies in adult patients presenting to the emergency department with IPH.We conducted a retrospective study of 623 consecutive adult patients presenting to the emergency department with IPH, who were evaluated with MDCTA during a 9-year period. CT angiograms were reviewed by 2 neuroradiologists to determine the IPH site and the presence of a vascular etiology. Patients with associated subarachnoid hemorrhage in the basal cisterns were excluded from the study. Medical records were reviewed for risk factors and correlation with final diagnosis. The diagnostic accuracy of MDCTA compared with conventional angiography, intraoperative evaluation, and pathologic findings was determined, when available. Multiple-variable logistic regression analysis was performed to determine clinical and radiologic factors that predict a higher yield of MDCTA.MDCTA demonstrated a vascular etiology in 91 patients (14.6%), with a sensitivity of 96%, specificity of 99%, and diagnostic accuracy of 98%. We found independent, statistically significant higher yields of MDCTA in patients with the following characteristics: 1) age younger than 46 years (47%); 2) lobar (20%) or infratentorial (16%) IPH, especially lobar IPH with associated intraventricular hemorrhage (25%); 3) female sex (18%); or 4) neither known hypertension nor impaired coagulation at presentation (33%).MDCTA is an accurate diagnostic examination in the evaluation of adult patients presenting with spontaneous IPH and should be performed in all patients with the aforementioned clinical and radiologic characteristics.Accuracy of computed tomography angiography in detecting the underlying vascular abnormalities for spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a comparative study and meta-analysis.Computed tomography angiography (CTA) is a rapid, non-invasive procedure with a small risk for evaluating patients with various types of strokes. But the effectiveness of CTA in detecting the etiology of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (SICH) has not been well established.To evaluate the diagnostic value of CTA for detecting underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with SICH.This is a comparative study to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of CTA and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in SICH. We also did a meta-analysis, combining our results with those of all previous studies to determine a more precise estimate of CTA in detecting the etiology of SICH..Between July 2009 and October 2011, CTA and DSA were routinely performed in consecutive young patients (age between 18 and 45 years) with acute non-hypertensive SICH. Imaging data were prospectively stored in the database for analysis.The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive values (PPV), negative predictive values (NPV), and accuracy were used for evaluating the diagnostic value of CTA for vascular lesion.This study included 92 patients. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of CTA for detecting DSA-positive pathologies were 94.6%, 100%, 100%, 96.5%, and 97.8%, respectively. A total of 544 cases were included for meta-analysis. The pooled sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of CTA for detecting the etiology in SICH were 95.4%, 98.3%, 96.9%, 97.4%, and 97.2%, respectively. There was no substantial heterogeneity between the studies.CTA has high PPV and NPV for vascular pathologies. It should be performed as the initial vascular investigation for patients with acute SICH. Future technical advancement of CTA is still needed to eliminate the false-negative results.First-line investigation of acute intracerebral hemorrhage using dynamic magnetic resonance angiography.To report the initial experience of magnetic resonance (MR) digital subtraction angiography (MR-DSA) in the dynamic assessment of the cerebral circulation in acute non-traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Twelve patients with acute ICH were investigated within 6 days of the ictus using a dynamic contrast-enhanced 2-D MR angiogram that produces subtracted images with a temporal resolution of 1-2 frame/s. The MR-DSA examinations were assessed for evidence of an intracranial vascular abnormality and were compared with (i) the routine MR sequences, (ii) non-dynamic time-of-flight MR angiography, and (iii) catheter angiogram performed during the same admission.All 12 MR-DSA examinations were considered to be technically satisfactory. MR-DSA detected an intracranial vascular abnormality in 7 patients (3 arteriovenous malformations, 2 aneurysms, 1 dural arteriovenous fistula, and 1 venous thrombosis). All abnormalities were confirmed by catheter angiography with the exception of one patient with venous sinus thrombosis found on MR imaging that did not undergo catheter angiography. All four arteriovenous shunts were detected by MR-DSA by virtue of early venous filling.MR-DSA can be performed satisfactorily in the setting of acute ICH and provides an alternative method to catheter angiography for identifying shunting vascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and fistulae, as well as large aneurysms and venous occlusions. MR-DSA is a contrast-medium-based technique that does not suffer from the T1 shortening effects of acute hemorrhage that can obscure abnormalities on conventional flow-based non-dynamic techniques.Computed tomographic angiography and venography for young or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.we compared the effectiveness of using computed tomographic angiography and venography (CTAV) with digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in young or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.we prospectively recruited 109 young (age between 18 and 45 years) or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage for this comparative study. All patients had CTAV using multidetector CT with 64 detectors. They were then scheduled to have catheter angiography the next day. Radiological data were collected for blinded analysis.DSA-positive pathologies causing hemorrhage were identified in 37 (33%) patients, which included cerebral arteriovenous malformation in 22 cases. The positive and negative predictive values of CTAV for DSA-positive pathologies causing hemorrhage were 97.3% (95% CI, 88.3%-99.9%) and 100% (95% CI, 95.9%-100%), respectively.CTAV was able to detect DSA-positive pathologies causing acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in young (age between 18 and 45 years) or nonhypertensive patients with high positive and negative predictive values.Multidetector row CT angiography in spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage: a prospective comparison with conventional angiography.The aim of our study was to assess the accuracy of multidetector row CT angiography (MDCTA) in the detection of the underlying vascular abnormalities causing spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) compared with conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA).Seventy-eight patients who underwent MDCTA with use of a 16-detector row scanner and DSA were prospectively included in this study. Each study was assessed by 2 independent blinded neuroradiologists; decisions were made in consensus. Findings on CT angiograms, including the original axial data, multiplanar reformations, and volume-rendered images with and without automated bone segmentation, were used to identify the underlying causes of ICH.Twenty-two of the 78 patients (28.2%) exhibited angiographic abnormalities, including aneurysms of the proximal arteries (n = 9), arteriovenous malformations (n = 7), Moyamoya disease (n = 4), and aneurysms of the distal arteries (n = 2). MDCTA detected the underlying vascular abnormalities in 21 patients except 1 case of small arteriovenous malformation. Overall sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy of MDCTA for detection of underlying vascular abnormalities were 95.5%, 100%, 100%, 98.2%, and 98.7%, respectively.MDCTA is a highly accurate imaging technique in the diagnosis of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with spontaneous lobar ICH.Detection of intracranial aneurysms with multislice CT: comparison with conventional angiography.We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of multislice CT in detection of intracranial aneurysms in patients presenting with subarachnoid or intracranial haemorrhage. Multislice CT and multiplanar digital subtraction angiography (DSA) images were obtained in 50 consecutive patients presenting with subarachnoid (SAH) and/or intracranial haemorrhage and reviewed by three neuroradiologists for the number, size and site of any aneurysms. The CT data were assessed using multiplanar reformats (MPR), maximum-intensity projections (MIP), surface-shaded display (SSD) and volume-rendering (VRT). In conventional angiography 51 aneurysms were detected in 41 patients. CT angiography (CTA) showed up to 48 aneurysms in 39 patients, depending on the observer. The overall sensitivity of multislice CT was 83.3% for small (< 4 mm), 90.6% for medium-size (5-12 mm) and 100% for large (> 13 mm) aneurysms. The sensitivity of multislice CTA to medium-size and large intracranial aneurysm is within the upper part of the range reported for helical single-slice CT. However, as small aneurysms may not be found, DSA remains the standard technique for investigation of SAH.Comparison of MR angiography and conventional angiography in the investigation of intracranial arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms in children.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is an attractive alternative to conventional catheter angiography (CCA) in children, especially for the detection of intracranial arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) or aneurysms in the out-of-hours setting, because it has fewer risks and complications. OBJECTIVE. To compare MRA with CCA for the detection of intracranial AVMs, aneurysms and arterial anatomy in children.Retrospective blinded review of MRAs and CCAs by two independent paediatric radiologists, in a group of 19 children already diagnosed with AVMs, aneurysms and subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) and who had undergone both imaging techniques.Abnormalities were identified on MRA in 15 of 19 patients and by CCA in 11 of 19 patients. MRA showed one aneurysm, nine AVMs, three haemorrhages and two indeterminate lesions. CCA showed nine AVMs and two indeterminate lesions. The two modalities showed excellent correlation in the detection of AVMs in nine patients. Vascular supply to the AVMs correlated well in four cases. There was complete disagreement in the determination of vessel supply in one case, and in two cases CCA showed additional vessel supply compared to MRA, while in two further cases MRA showed an additional vessel supply compared to CCA. CCA was superior to MRA in demonstrating arterial anatomy, except with regard to the anterior and posterior communicating arteries where MRA was superior.The high sensitivity of MRA in the detection of AVMs when compared to CCA and the low incidence of aneurysms support the use of MRA as the initial imaging modality when intracranial haemorrhage is diagnosed on CT, especially in the out-of-hours setting.Vascular disorders--magnetic resonance angiography: brain vessels.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain obtained at 3 T imaging has made a significant clinical impact. MRA benefits from acquisition at higher magnetic field strength because of higher available signal-to-noise ratio and improved relative background suppression due to magnetic field strength-related T1 lengthening. Parallel imaging techniques are ideally suited for high-field MRA. Many of the developments that have made 3 T MRA of the brain successful can be regarded as enabling technologies that are essential for further development of 7 T MRA, which brings additional challenges.Accuracy of CT angiography for the diagnosis of vascular abnormalities causing intraparenchymal hemorrhage in young patients.The objective of this study is to measure the accuracy of multidetector CT angiography (MD CTA) in the detection of vascular abnormalities in patients <or=40 years with spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage (IPH) presenting to the emergency department. After institutional review board approval, a retrospective study was performed of 43 consecutive patients <or=40 years, who presented to our emergency department with IPH and that were evaluated with MD CTA. MD CTA images were reviewed by a neuroradiologist to determine IPH location, presence of a vascular abnormality, and associated extraparenchymal hemorrhage. Diagnostic accuracy was measured comparing it to the available reference standards, which included conventional catheter angiogram (CCA), surgical macroscopic findings, and pathology results. Medical records were reviewed for risk factors and correlation with final diagnosis. MD CTA demonstrated an accuracy of 97.7%, with a sensitivity of 96.4% (95% CI 0.79-0.99) and a specificity of 100% (95% CI 0.74-0.99) for the detection of vascular abnormalities in young patients with IPH. Additionally, MD CTA had a PPV of 100%, and the NPV 93.8% in this population. Of the 43 patients included in the study, 28 patients (65%) had a causative vascular etiology for the IPH. Among the 28 patients with vascular etiologies for the IPH, 11 had an AVM (39.2%), nine a ruptured aneurysm (32.14%), seven dural venous sinus thrombosis (25%), and one had vasculitis (3.57%). MD CTA is highly accurate in the detection of vascular abnormalities in the setting of IPH, which as a group represents the most frequent etiology of IPH among patients age <or=40 years. MD CTA performed in the Emergency Department provides accurate, rapid and critical presurgical and premedical treatment information in young patients with IPH.Early elective surgical exploration of spontaneous intracerebral hematomas of unknown origin.The management of non-life threatening spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage with no obvious medical etiology in patients and the lack of findings on images has not been clearly defined. In general, the current practice is to treat these patients conservatively and repeat studies to rule out a treatable cause 6 weeks to 3 months later; more often than not these repeated studies fail to reveal any findings, and the patient is treated conservatively. For years, the senior author (R.C.H.) has treated these patients with early surgical exploration. This study was undertaken prospectively to ascertain the frequency of positive findings during surgical exploration.Between 2000 and 2007, the authors prospectively collected data from 9 cases (4 cerebellar, 4 lobar, and 1 caudate head) of unexplained intraparenchymal hemorrhages. The patient age ranged from 18 to 45 years (mean 31.2 years). All patients were normotensive, had no underlying medical problems explaining such a hemorrhage, and failed to exhibit findings on cerebral angiograms. Magnetic resonance images with contrast showed no abnormal vasculature or enhancement. Eight patients underwent elective surgical exploration in the subacute stage, and urgent decompression of the clot was necessary in 1.In 7 (77.8%) of the 9 cases, histopathological examination revealed a cause for the hemorrhage (3 "cryptic" arteriovenous malformations, 3 cavernomas, and 1 neoplasm). A good outcome was achieved in all 8 patients who underwent elective surgery.The authors recommend elective surgical exploration of intracerebral hematomas of unknown etiology provided that the hematoma is surgically accessible and the patient is relatively young and healthy. Early exploration and resection can provide a cure and eliminate the risk of rebleeding when a vascular lesion is found or guide further treatment in cases of tumor.MR imaging of recent non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage: early experience at 3 T.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using 3.0 T scanners in the clinical environment is in its infancy and is only available at a limited number of sites worldwide. There is great interest amongst radiologists about the perceived benefits of clinical imaging at 3.0 T; however, it remains to be seen whether the theoretical advantages will bring real gains. MRI in patients with non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is difficult, yet, these patients benefit from non-invasive angiography. Conventional catheter angiography (CCA) remains the reference standard for excluding/confirming the presence of intracranial vascular abnormalities, but MR angiography at 3.0 T may offer opportunities for significant changes in patient management. We present our experiences of using 3.0 T MR angiography in 27 patients with acute or early subacute ICH.Application of magnetic resonance angiography to neurosurgical practice: a critical review of 150 cases.The potential role of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in clinical neurosurgical practice was evaluated in 150 consecutive patients in an attempt to define clinical situations in which it aided in diagnosis, helped guide treatment options, and/or possibly eliminated the need for conventional catheter angiography. Among patients with nonvascular pathology (n = 42), MRA provided useful clinical information in 55% of cases, and could have effectively replaced catheter angiography in 76% of cases. In this group of patients, MRA provided excellent depiction of tumour and vessel relationships, and in conjunction with conventional imaging modalities reliably ruled out the question of tumour versus aneurysm whenever that question was raised. Among patients with vascular lesions (n = 108), MRA visualized the lesion in 18 of 20 (90%) aneurysms, 11 of 11 (100%) vascular malformations, 31 or 31 (100%) cases with known occlusive vascular disease, and reliably excluded occlusive vascular disease in 19 of 30 (63%) cases. The MRA potentially could have replaced conventional catheter angiography in less than 8% of cases with vascular pathology treated surgically, and in 76% of cases with vascular pathology treated medically or expectantly. Imaging time was relatively short, 10 to 20 minutes for intracranial vessels and 6.5 to 13 minutes for extracranial vessels. Shortcomings included the lack of spacial resolution required for surgical planning and the possible misleading information in the settings of low flow and partial thrombosis. It is concluded that currently available MRA modalities contribute useful information in a wide spectrum of neurosurgical clinical situations including screening and serial follow-up.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)The value of magnetic resonance imaging for the detection of the bleeding source in non-traumatic intracerebral haemorrhages: a comparison with conventional digital subtraction angiography.Conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is currently regarded as the gold standard in detecting underlying vascular pathologies in patients with intracerebral haemorrhages (ICH). However, the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the diagnostic workup of ICHs has considerably increased in recent years. Our aim was to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and yield of MRI for the detection of the underlying aetiology in ICH patients.Sixty-seven consecutive patients with an acute ICH who underwent MRI (including magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and DSA during their diagnostic workup) were included in the study. Magnetic resonance images were retrospectively analysed by two independent neuroradiologists to determine the localisation and cause of the ICH. DSA was used as a reference standard.In seven patients (10.4%), a DSA-positive vascular aetiology was present (one aneurysm, four arteriovenous malformations, one dural arteriovenous fistula and one vasculitis). All of these cases were correctly diagnosed by both readers on MRI. In addition, MRI revealed the following probable bleeding causes in 39 of the 60 DSA-negative patients: cerebral amyloid angiopathy (17), cavernoma (9), arterial hypertension (8), haemorrhagic transformation of an ischaemic infarction (3) and malignant brain tumour with secondary ICH (2).Performing MRI with MRA proved to be an accurate diagnostic tool in detecting vascular malformations in patients with ICH. In addition, MRI provided valuable information regarding DSA-negative ICH causes, and thus had a high diagnostic yield in ICH patients.Emergency noninvasive angiography for acute intracerebral hemorrhage.Spontaneous ICH is a devastating condition and is associated with significant mortality in the acute phase due to ongoing hemorrhage and hematoma expansion. A growing body of evidence suggests that there may be considerable utility in performing noninvasive vascular imaging during the acute-to-early phase of ICH. CTA has become widely available and is sensitive and specific for detecting vascular causes of secondary ICH such as aneurysms, arteriovenous malformations, dural arteriovenous fistulas, intracranial dissections, and neoplasm. CT venography can also diagnose dural sinus thrombosis presenting as hemorrhagic infarction. Recent data from stroke populations demonstrate a relatively low risk to patients when contrast is administered in the absence of a known serum creatinine. Detection of acute contrast extravasation within the hematoma ("spot sign") with CT angiography is predictive of subsequent hematoma expansion and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. Risk stratification based on acute CTA can inform and expedite decision-making regarding intensive care unit admission, blood pressure control, correction of coagulopathy, and neurosurgical consultation. Noninvasive vascular imaging should be considered as an important component of the initial diagnostic work-up for patients presenting with acute ICH.Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography.Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography is a powerful tool for the evaluation of cervical and intracranial vasculature. Both noncontrast and contrast-enhanced MR angiography can provide exquisite vascular contrast and detail without the use of ionizing radiation. More advanced techniques such as time-resolved MR angiography and parallel imaging provide dynamic information in rapid fashion. This article describes the basic principles and techniques of MR angiography image acquisition.Three-dimensional computerized tomography angiography in patients with hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage.The authors confirm the usefulness of extravasation detected on three-dimensional computerized tomography (3D-CT) angiography in the diagnosis of continued hemorrhage and establishment of its cause in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Thirty-one patients with acute ICH in whom noncontrast and 3D-CT angiography had been performed within 12 hours of the onset of hemorrhage and in whom conventional cerebral angiographic studies were obtained during the chronic stage were prospectively studied. Noncontrast CT scanning was repeated within 24 hours of the onset of ICH to evaluate hematoma enlargement. Findings indicating extravasation on 3D-CT angiography, including any abnormal area of high density on helical CT scanning, were observed in five patients; three of these demonstrated hematoma enlargement on follow-up CT studies. Thus, specificity was 60% (three correct predictions among five positives) and sensitivity was 100% (19 correct predictions among 19 negatives). Evidence of extravasation on 3D-CT angiography indicates that there is persistent hemorrhage and correlates with enlargement of the hematoma. Regarding the cause of hemorrhage, five cerebral aneurysms were visualized in four patients, and two diagnoses of moyamoya disease and one of unilateral moyamoya phenomenon were made with the aid of 3D-CT angiography. Emergency surgery was performed without conventional angiography in one patient who had an aneurysm, and it was clipped successfully.Overall, 3D-CT angiography was found to be valuable in the diagnosis of the cause of hemorrhage and in the detection of persistent hemorrhage in patients with acute ICH.Comparison of MRI, CT and angiography in cerebral arteriovenous malformations.Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cerebral angiography were performed in 30 patients with cerebral arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). Clinical data and radiographic findings are presented. The diagnostic values of CT and MRI are compared. 25 of 30 AVMs were seen on CT-scans, 27 on MR-images, 26 by angiography. Typical CT-findings were irregularly hyperdense areas with spotlike contrast enhancement. 4 out of 5 AVMs not depicted by CT were diagnosed for tumor, in one case the malformation was hidden by a hematoma. MRI mostly showed the AVM as round or oval lesions with spongelike structure of low signal intensity in T1-weighted sequences or as single enlarged vessels. The 26 AVM revealed by angiography presented typically enlarged vessels; in 2 cases angiography was without any pathological findings, 2 cases showed signs of a space occupying lesion. The results confirm that MRI is superior to CT in detecting and recognizing AVM. Its strength lies in the possibility to detect abnormal vessels even in presence of fresh or older hematoma, and in the precise information on size and location of the AVM. In our series, MRI and CT-scans together showed 28 of 30 AVMs, the remaining 2 cases were not seen with angiography either but only proven histologically. Although today MR-angiography is able to provide three dimensional images of blood vessels, it cannot yet replace angiography in the exact study of the vessels which is required for surgical planning.Spontaneous intracranial hematomas: role of dynamic CT and angiography.Forty-five patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) were studied prospectively by dynamic CT and cerebral angiography. The accuracy of dynamic CT in demonstrating the underlying vascular cause in ICH was evaluated. Dynamic CT correctly predicted 90% of aneurysms, 83% of AVMs and 100% of normal studies as compared to angiography. Cerebral angiography can be obviated in patients where dynamic CT does not show any obvious vascular anomaly.CT angiography versus MR angiography in the evaluation of acute neurovascular disease.Vascular imaging adds value in investigation of basal ganglia hemorrhage.The risk of basal ganglia hemorrhage (BGH) increases in patients of older age and with hypertension. Current guidelines do not recommend routine vascular imaging. However, a proportion of patients with BGH have underlying vascular abnormalities, and these patients may require a different treatment approach. We aimed to assess the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. In this retrospective study, we included all patients who presented with BGH between January 2007 and December 2009 at a single institution. The following data were collected: patient demographics, vascular risk factors, medications, volume of hematoma, CT scans, CT angiogram, magnetic resonance angiography and digital subtraction angiography. We determined the proportion of underlying vascular abnormalities and correlated these findings with risk factors for BGH. A total of 113 consecutive patients with BGH were identified, and vascular imaging was performed in 61. The median age was 62 years and 48 (78.7%) of these patients were male. Forty-two (68.9%) of 61 patients had hypertension. Positive vascular imaging findings were identified in eight of 61 patients (13.1%): three intracranial aneurysms, three cavernous malformations, one Moyamoya disease and one arteriovenous malformation. There were no significant associations between demographic features, vascular risk factors and the hematoma volume between patients with positive and negative vascular imaging. Specifically, an underlying vascular abnormality was not associated with age (≥ 60 years, 6/36 patients had an underlying vascular abnormality, compared with 2/25 patients< 60 years; p=not significant [n.s.]). There was no relationship with hypertension (5/42 hypertensive patients and 3/19 normotensive patients (n.s.) had an underlying vascular abnormality). We concluded that there is a significant proportion of relevant underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with BGH. This likelihood is not predicted by risk factors such as hypertension and age. These findings indicate the importance of vascular imaging in patients with BGH who are not neurologically devastated.Comparisons of DSA and MR angiography with digital subtraction angiography in 151 patients with subacute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.To exclude underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage, the traditional paradigm requires investigation using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in both the acute and subacute phases. We investigated whether MRI and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), in the subacute stage of intracerebral hematoma, had high positive predictive values (PPV) and negative predictive values (NPV) in screening for vascular abnormality in the routine clinical setting. In a regional neurosurgical center in Hong Kong, we retrospectively reviewed 151 patients investigated with both MRI and DSA for underlying structural vascular abnormalities during the subacute phase. Sensitivity, specificity, and intermodality agreement were assessed. A total of 70/151 (46%) vascular lesions accountable for the hemorrhage were found. Patients with vascular abnormalities tended to be younger (mean age+/-standard deviation [SD], 33+/-15years), less likely to be hypertensive (6.3%), and the lesion was more likely to be accompanied by intraventricular hemorrhage (22%). In terms of cerebral arteriovenous malformation and dural arteriovenous fistulas, MRI/MRA had a PPV of 0.98 and a NPV of 1.00. We concluded that MRI/MRA was able to detect most structural vascular abnormalities in the subacute phase in most patients and, thus, its use is recommended as the screening test.Our own experience with CT angiography in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations.Computed tomography (CT) and intraarterial cerebral angiography are essential methods in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. In recent years however non-invasive or minimally invasive methods like MR angiography and CT angiography (CTA), which could potentially replace angiography, have been developed. The aim of presented study is to demonstrate our own experience in application of CTA in early diagnosis of cerebral vascular malformations. The material consists of 86 CTA examinations performed shortly after non-traumatic intracranial haemorrhage. Angiographic correlation has been available in 23 patients and surgical one--in 31 cases. CTA studies began with serio-CT to select the optimal time between contrast injection and CT scanning. After that 100-120 ml of non-ionic contrast medium was injected intravenously (5 ml per sec.) and spiral CT acqusition was performed with the delay calculated on the basis of the serio-CT. The obtained images were postprocessed on the workstation using always MIP and in many cases also SSD and VRT reconstructions. Vascular malformations have been diagnosed in 44 of 86 CTA studies including 38 patients with aneurysms (total number 51) and 6 patients with AVMs. In 17 cases the diameter of the aneurysm did not exceed 5 mm. In all surgical cases the CTA diagnosis of the aneurysm has been confirmed. There was however one false-negative case. On the other hand in 7 patients CTA revealed the small aneurysm, despite unclear angiographic appearance. In 2 of 6 patients with CTA suspicion of AVM this diagnosis has been excluded either by angiography or surgery. Comparison of CTA and angiography in 22 aneurysms showed in 17 cases superiority of CTA in evaluation of aneurysmal neck and the relationship between aneurysm and adjacent vessels (especially with VRT and SSD reconstructions). In patients with AVMs however the evaluation of supplying and draining vessels was better with angiography. On the base of our material we can conclude that CTA is very efficient in detecting and evaluating the aneurysms. We believe that CTA can replace angiography if it reveals aneurysm in a site corresponding with location of haemorrhage on CT. In patients with suspicion of AVM value of CTA is doubtful and angiography remains the method of choice.Efficiency of CT-angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms.CT-angiography is a non-invasive method, alternative to cerebral angiography in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms. The aim of the study was the assessment of the efficiency of CT-angiography in a large material, which has been mostly verified with angiography and/or surgery.CT-angiography was performed in 196 patients with intracranial bleeding. Seventy-three (73) patients underwent also cerebral angiography (CA), 121 were operated on, 74 of them solely on the basis of CT-angiography. A spiral CT scanning (2 mm slices, 1-1.5 pitch, 1 mm-gap reconstruction) combined with an injection of 120 mL of contrast medium (5 mL/sec) was used. Subsequently three-dimensional MIP reconstructions were received, supplemented in some cases with SSD, VRT and MPR.CT-angiography revealed 128 aneurysms in 106 patients, located mostly in anterior communicating, middle cerebral and internal carotid arteries. The size of most aneurysms was 6-10 mm, but nearly one-third of them did not exceed 5 mm. In the group of patients who underwent CA, there was only 1 false negative CT-angiography result, while in 7 patients CT-angiography allowed for the diagnosis of small aneurysms which were not clearly visible on CA. CT-angiography was superior to CA in assessment of aneurysm morphology by 3 independent radiologists in 17 out of 22 cases. CT-angiography findings were confirmed during surgery in all 74 patients.CT-angiography is highly effective in the diagnosis of intracranial aneurysms and the evaluation of their morphology. In our opinion, in most cases, CT-angiography is precise enough to plan a surgical or endovascular procedure.Comparison of CTA to DSA in determining the etiology of spontaneous ICH.To compare the efficacy of computed tomographic angiography (CTA) to that of digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in the detection of secondary causes of intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Between January 2001 and February 2007 there were 286 patients that had both CTA and DSA for intracranial hemorrhage of all types. Those with primarily subarachnoid hemorrhage or recent trauma were excluded. Fifty-five patients formed the study cohort. Three reviewers independently analyzed the CTAs in a blinded protocol and classified them based on presence or absence of a secondary etiology. Results were compared with the reference standard DSA and kappa values determined for interobserver variability.The overall sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy of CTA were 89%, 92%, 91%, 91% and 91%, respectively. Kappa value for interobserver agreement ranged from 0.78 to 0.89. Two of four dural arteriovenous fistulas (dAVF) were missed on CTA by all three reviewers.CTA is nearly as effective as DSA at determining the cause of secondary intracerebral hemorrhage, but with a lower sensitivity for dAVFs. This supports the use of CTA as the first screening test in patients presenting with spontaneous ICH.A rule to identify patients who require magnetic resonance imaging after intracerebral hemorrhage.A study performed in Hong Kong of catheter angiography after ICH found a high rate of structural lesions in patients 45 years of age or younger, without a history of hypertension, or with lobar hemorrhage. We hypothesized that a clinical decision rule based on these Hong Kong criteria would reliably identify patients who require MRI after ICH.We identified all patients admitted with ICH to our medical center during a 5-year period who underwent brain MRI. Patients were excluded if the history revealed an obvious cause of ICH. Two study neurologists independently adjudicated whether MRI revealed the cause of ICH. We devised a rule recommending MRI if patients met one or more Hong Kong criteria, and calculated the proportion of patients with diagnostic MRI studies who would have been identified by this rule. We also examined the performance of a modified rule using age ≤ 55 years.The original Hong Kong rule applied to 102 of the 148 patients in our cohort (69%), and would have recommended MRI in 25 of 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (93%, 95% CI 76-99%). The modified rule applied to 110 patients (74%), and would have recommended MRI in all 27 patients with diagnostic MRI studies (100%, 95% CI 91-100%).A rule based on simple clinical criteria may be useful for stratifying the yield of MRI after ICH. If validated in further studies, such a rule could reduce the number of unnecessary MRI studies after ICH, leading to more cost-effective care.Diagnostic accuracy and yield of multidetector CT angiography in the evaluation of spontaneous intraparenchymal cerebral hemorrhage.Multidetector CT angiography (MDCTA) is emerging as the favored initial diagnostic examination in the evaluation of patients presenting with spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage (IPH). This study aims to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy and yield of MDCTA for the detection of vascular etiologies in adult patients presenting to the emergency department with IPH.We conducted a retrospective study of 623 consecutive adult patients presenting to the emergency department with IPH, who were evaluated with MDCTA during a 9-year period. CT angiograms were reviewed by 2 neuroradiologists to determine the IPH site and the presence of a vascular etiology. Patients with associated subarachnoid hemorrhage in the basal cisterns were excluded from the study. Medical records were reviewed for risk factors and correlation with final diagnosis. The diagnostic accuracy of MDCTA compared with conventional angiography, intraoperative evaluation, and pathologic findings was determined, when available. Multiple-variable logistic regression analysis was performed to determine clinical and radiologic factors that predict a higher yield of MDCTA.MDCTA demonstrated a vascular etiology in 91 patients (14.6%), with a sensitivity of 96%, specificity of 99%, and diagnostic accuracy of 98%. We found independent, statistically significant higher yields of MDCTA in patients with the following characteristics: 1) age younger than 46 years (47%); 2) lobar (20%) or infratentorial (16%) IPH, especially lobar IPH with associated intraventricular hemorrhage (25%); 3) female sex (18%); or 4) neither known hypertension nor impaired coagulation at presentation (33%).MDCTA is an accurate diagnostic examination in the evaluation of adult patients presenting with spontaneous IPH and should be performed in all patients with the aforementioned clinical and radiologic characteristics.Accuracy of computed tomography angiography in detecting the underlying vascular abnormalities for spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage: a comparative study and meta-analysis.Computed tomography angiography (CTA) is a rapid, non-invasive procedure with a small risk for evaluating patients with various types of strokes. But the effectiveness of CTA in detecting the etiology of spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage (SICH) has not been well established.To evaluate the diagnostic value of CTA for detecting underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with SICH.This is a comparative study to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of CTA and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in SICH. We also did a meta-analysis, combining our results with those of all previous studies to determine a more precise estimate of CTA in detecting the etiology of SICH..Between July 2009 and October 2011, CTA and DSA were routinely performed in consecutive young patients (age between 18 and 45 years) with acute non-hypertensive SICH. Imaging data were prospectively stored in the database for analysis.The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive values (PPV), negative predictive values (NPV), and accuracy were used for evaluating the diagnostic value of CTA for vascular lesion.This study included 92 patients. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of CTA for detecting DSA-positive pathologies were 94.6%, 100%, 100%, 96.5%, and 97.8%, respectively. A total of 544 cases were included for meta-analysis. The pooled sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of CTA for detecting the etiology in SICH were 95.4%, 98.3%, 96.9%, 97.4%, and 97.2%, respectively. There was no substantial heterogeneity between the studies.CTA has high PPV and NPV for vascular pathologies. It should be performed as the initial vascular investigation for patients with acute SICH. Future technical advancement of CTA is still needed to eliminate the false-negative results.First-line investigation of acute intracerebral hemorrhage using dynamic magnetic resonance angiography.To report the initial experience of magnetic resonance (MR) digital subtraction angiography (MR-DSA) in the dynamic assessment of the cerebral circulation in acute non-traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH).Twelve patients with acute ICH were investigated within 6 days of the ictus using a dynamic contrast-enhanced 2-D MR angiogram that produces subtracted images with a temporal resolution of 1-2 frame/s. The MR-DSA examinations were assessed for evidence of an intracranial vascular abnormality and were compared with (i) the routine MR sequences, (ii) non-dynamic time-of-flight MR angiography, and (iii) catheter angiogram performed during the same admission.All 12 MR-DSA examinations were considered to be technically satisfactory. MR-DSA detected an intracranial vascular abnormality in 7 patients (3 arteriovenous malformations, 2 aneurysms, 1 dural arteriovenous fistula, and 1 venous thrombosis). All abnormalities were confirmed by catheter angiography with the exception of one patient with venous sinus thrombosis found on MR imaging that did not undergo catheter angiography. All four arteriovenous shunts were detected by MR-DSA by virtue of early venous filling.MR-DSA can be performed satisfactorily in the setting of acute ICH and provides an alternative method to catheter angiography for identifying shunting vascular abnormalities such as arteriovenous malformations and fistulae, as well as large aneurysms and venous occlusions. MR-DSA is a contrast-medium-based technique that does not suffer from the T1 shortening effects of acute hemorrhage that can obscure abnormalities on conventional flow-based non-dynamic techniques.Computed tomographic angiography and venography for young or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.we compared the effectiveness of using computed tomographic angiography and venography (CTAV) with digital subtraction angiography (DSA) in young or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage.we prospectively recruited 109 young (age between 18 and 45 years) or nonhypertensive patients with acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage for this comparative study. All patients had CTAV using multidetector CT with 64 detectors. They were then scheduled to have catheter angiography the next day. Radiological data were collected for blinded analysis.DSA-positive pathologies causing hemorrhage were identified in 37 (33%) patients, which included cerebral arteriovenous malformation in 22 cases. The positive and negative predictive values of CTAV for DSA-positive pathologies causing hemorrhage were 97.3% (95% CI, 88.3%-99.9%) and 100% (95% CI, 95.9%-100%), respectively.CTAV was able to detect DSA-positive pathologies causing acute spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in young (age between 18 and 45 years) or nonhypertensive patients with high positive and negative predictive values.Multidetector row CT angiography in spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage: a prospective comparison with conventional angiography.The aim of our study was to assess the accuracy of multidetector row CT angiography (MDCTA) in the detection of the underlying vascular abnormalities causing spontaneous lobar intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) compared with conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA).Seventy-eight patients who underwent MDCTA with use of a 16-detector row scanner and DSA were prospectively included in this study. Each study was assessed by 2 independent blinded neuroradiologists; decisions were made in consensus. Findings on CT angiograms, including the original axial data, multiplanar reformations, and volume-rendered images with and without automated bone segmentation, were used to identify the underlying causes of ICH.Twenty-two of the 78 patients (28.2%) exhibited angiographic abnormalities, including aneurysms of the proximal arteries (n = 9), arteriovenous malformations (n = 7), Moyamoya disease (n = 4), and aneurysms of the distal arteries (n = 2). MDCTA detected the underlying vascular abnormalities in 21 patients except 1 case of small arteriovenous malformation. Overall sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy of MDCTA for detection of underlying vascular abnormalities were 95.5%, 100%, 100%, 98.2%, and 98.7%, respectively.MDCTA is a highly accurate imaging technique in the diagnosis of underlying vascular abnormalities in patients with spontaneous lobar ICH.Detection of intracranial aneurysms with multislice CT: comparison with conventional angiography.We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of multislice CT in detection of intracranial aneurysms in patients presenting with subarachnoid or intracranial haemorrhage. Multislice CT and multiplanar digital subtraction angiography (DSA) images were obtained in 50 consecutive patients presenting with subarachnoid (SAH) and/or intracranial haemorrhage and reviewed by three neuroradiologists for the number, size and site of any aneurysms. The CT data were assessed using multiplanar reformats (MPR), maximum-intensity projections (MIP), surface-shaded display (SSD) and volume-rendering (VRT). In conventional angiography 51 aneurysms were detected in 41 patients. CT angiography (CTA) showed up to 48 aneurysms in 39 patients, depending on the observer. The overall sensitivity of multislice CT was 83.3% for small (< 4 mm), 90.6% for medium-size (5-12 mm) and 100% for large (> 13 mm) aneurysms. The sensitivity of multislice CTA to medium-size and large intracranial aneurysm is within the upper part of the range reported for helical single-slice CT. However, as small aneurysms may not be found, DSA remains the standard technique for investigation of SAH.Comparison of MR angiography and conventional angiography in the investigation of intracranial arteriovenous malformations and aneurysms in children.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) is an attractive alternative to conventional catheter angiography (CCA) in children, especially for the detection of intracranial arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) or aneurysms in the out-of-hours setting, because it has fewer risks and complications. OBJECTIVE. To compare MRA with CCA for the detection of intracranial AVMs, aneurysms and arterial anatomy in children.Retrospective blinded review of MRAs and CCAs by two independent paediatric radiologists, in a group of 19 children already diagnosed with AVMs, aneurysms and subarachnoid haemorrhage (SAH) and who had undergone both imaging techniques.Abnormalities were identified on MRA in 15 of 19 patients and by CCA in 11 of 19 patients. MRA showed one aneurysm, nine AVMs, three haemorrhages and two indeterminate lesions. CCA showed nine AVMs and two indeterminate lesions. The two modalities showed excellent correlation in the detection of AVMs in nine patients. Vascular supply to the AVMs correlated well in four cases. There was complete disagreement in the determination of vessel supply in one case, and in two cases CCA showed additional vessel supply compared to MRA, while in two further cases MRA showed an additional vessel supply compared to CCA. CCA was superior to MRA in demonstrating arterial anatomy, except with regard to the anterior and posterior communicating arteries where MRA was superior.The high sensitivity of MRA in the detection of AVMs when compared to CCA and the low incidence of aneurysms support the use of MRA as the initial imaging modality when intracranial haemorrhage is diagnosed on CT, especially in the out-of-hours setting.Vascular disorders--magnetic resonance angiography: brain vessels.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain obtained at 3 T imaging has made a significant clinical impact. MRA benefits from acquisition at higher magnetic field strength because of higher available signal-to-noise ratio and improved relative background suppression due to magnetic field strength-related T1 lengthening. Parallel imaging techniques are ideally suited for high-field MRA. Many of the developments that have made 3 T MRA of the brain successful can be regarded as enabling technologies that are essential for further development of 7 T MRA, which brings additional challenges.Accuracy of CT angiography for the diagnosis of vascular abnormalities causing intraparenchymal hemorrhage in young patients.The objective of this study is to measure the accuracy of multidetector CT angiography (MD CTA) in the detection of vascular abnormalities in patients <or=40 years with spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage (IPH) presenting to the emergency department. After institutional review board approval, a retrospective study was performed of 43 consecutive patients <or=40 years, who presented to our emergency department with IPH and that were evaluated with MD CTA. MD CTA images were reviewed by a neuroradiologist to determine IPH location, presence of a vascular abnormality, and associated extraparenchymal hemorrhage. Diagnostic accuracy was measured comparing it to the available reference standards, which included conventional catheter angiogram (CCA), surgical macroscopic findings, and pathology results. Medical records were reviewed for risk factors and correlation with final diagnosis. MD CTA demonstrated an accuracy of 97.7%, with a sensitivity of 96.4% (95% CI 0.79-0.99) and a specificity of 100% (95% CI 0.74-0.99) for the detection of vascular abnormalities in young patients with IPH. Additionally, MD CTA had a PPV of 100%, and the NPV 93.8% in this population. Of the 43 patients included in the study, 28 patients (65%) had a causative vascular etiology for the IPH. Among the 28 patients with vascular etiologies for the IPH, 11 had an AVM (39.2%), nine a ruptured aneurysm (32.14%), seven dural venous sinus thrombosis (25%), and one had vasculitis (3.57%). MD CTA is highly accurate in the detection of vascular abnormalities in the setting of IPH, which as a group represents the most frequent etiology of IPH among patients age <or=40 years. MD CTA performed in the Emergency Department provides accurate, rapid and critical presurgical and premedical treatment information in young patients with IPH.Early elective surgical exploration of spontaneous intracerebral hematomas of unknown origin.The management of non-life threatening spontaneous intraparenchymal hemorrhage with no obvious medical etiology in patients and the lack of findings on images has not been clearly defined. In general, the current practice is to treat these patients conservatively and repeat studies to rule out a treatable cause 6 weeks to 3 months later; more often than not these repeated studies fail to reveal any findings, and the patient is treated conservatively. For years, the senior author (R.C.H.) has treated these patients with early surgical exploration. This study was undertaken prospectively to ascertain the frequency of positive findings during surgical exploration.Between 2000 and 2007, the authors prospectively collected data from 9 cases (4 cerebellar, 4 lobar, and 1 caudate head) of unexplained intraparenchymal hemorrhages. The patient age ranged from 18 to 45 years (mean 31.2 years). All patients were normotensive, had no underlying medical problems explaining such a hemorrhage, and failed to exhibit findings on cerebral angiograms. Magnetic resonance images with contrast showed no abnormal vasculature or enhancement. Eight patients underwent elective surgical exploration in the subacute stage, and urgent decompression of the clot was necessary in 1.In 7 (77.8%) of the 9 cases, histopathological examination revealed a cause for the hemorrhage (3 "cryptic" arteriovenous malformations, 3 cavernomas, and 1 neoplasm). A good outcome was achieved in all 8 patients who underwent elective surgery.The authors recommend elective surgical exploration of intracerebral hematomas of unknown etiology provided that the hematoma is surgically accessible and the patient is relatively young and healthy. Early exploration and resection can provide a cure and eliminate the risk of rebleeding when a vascular lesion is found or guide further treatment in cases of tumor.MR imaging of recent non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage: early experience at 3 T.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) using 3.0 T scanners in the clinical environment is in its infancy and is only available at a limited number of sites worldwide. There is great interest amongst radiologists about the perceived benefits of clinical imaging at 3.0 T; however, it remains to be seen whether the theoretical advantages will bring real gains. MRI in patients with non-traumatic intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) is difficult, yet, these patients benefit from non-invasive angiography. Conventional catheter angiography (CCA) remains the reference standard for excluding/confirming the presence of intracranial vascular abnormalities, but MR angiography at 3.0 T may offer opportunities for significant changes in patient management. We present our experiences of using 3.0 T MR angiography in 27 patients with acute or early subacute ICH.