Do all patients with hematologic malignancies and severe thrombocytopenia need prophylactic platelet transfusions? Background, rationale, and design of a clinical trial (trial of platelet prophylaxis) to assess the effectiveness of prophylactic platelet transfusions.Although considerable advances have been made in many aspects of platelet transfusion therapy in the last 30 years, some areas continue to provoke debate, including the use of prophylactic platelet transfusions for the prevention of thrombocytopenic bleeding in patients with bone marrow failure. We have designed a randomized controlled trial to compare prophylactic platelet use with a threshold of a platelet count of 10 x 10(9)/L with no prophylaxis in adult thrombocytopenic patients with hematologic malignancies. The trial question is whether a no-prophylactic policy for the use of platelet transfusions in patients with hematologic malignancies is not inferior to a threshold prophylactic policy at 10 x 10(9)/L, for bleeding at World Health Organization (WHO) grade 2, 3, or 4, up to 30 days from randomization. The primary outcome measure is the proportion of patients who have a significant clinical bleed, defined as WHO grade 2 or higher up to 30 days from randomization. Subsidiary clinical outcome measures include time to first bleed and a descriptive analysis of all severe bleeds. A bleeding assessment form is completed daily for all study subjects until day 30 from randomization. Minor modifications were made to the definitions at WHO grades 1 and 2 for petechiae and duration of nose bleeds, after piloting of the bleeding assessment forms. This study has been designed as a 2-stage randomized trial with an interim analysis planned after a minimum of 100 patients had been randomized and had completed their period of observation. Patients have initially been enrolled through 3 United Kingdom hematology centers. The interim analysis has been completed, and the results have confirmed a final sample size of 600 patients. Recruitment is now being extended to other centers in United Kingdom and Australia. Local research nurses are not blinded to treatment allocation, but a number of measures to reduce risk of assessment bias include repeated education around standard operating procedures, common definitions, and duplication of assessments. The expected completion date for the 5-year study is December 2011.Therapeutic platelet transfusion versus routine prophylactic transfusion in patients with haematological malignancies: an open-label, multicentre, randomised study.Routine prophylactic platelet transfusion is the standard of care for patients with severe thrombocytopenia. We assessed the effect of a new strategy of therapeutic platelet transfusion on the number of transfusions and safety in patients with hypoproliferative thrombocytopenia.We did a multicentre, open-label, randomised parallel-group trial at eight haematology centres in Germany. Patients aged 16-80 years, who were undergoing intensive chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukaemia or autologous haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation for haematological cancers, were randomly assigned via a computer-generated randomisation sequence to receive either platelet transfusion when bleeding occurred (therapeutic strategy) or when morning platelet counts were 10×10(9) per L or lower (prophylactic strategy). Investigators undertaking interventions were not masked to group assignment. The primary endpoint was the number of platelet transfusions. Analysis was by intention to treat. This trial is registered, NCT00521664.197 patients were assigned the prophylactic strategy and 199 the therapeutic strategy. Of 391 patients analysed, the therapeutic strategy reduced the mean number of platelet transfusions by 33·5% (95% CI 22·2-43·1; p<0·0001) in all patients (2·44 [2·22-2·67] in prophylactic group vs 1·63 [1·42-1·83] in therapeutic group), 31·6% (18·6-42·6; p<0·0001) in those with acute myeloid leukaemia (2·68 [2·35-3·01] vs 1·83 [1·58-2·10]), and 34·2% (6·6-53·7; p=0·0193) in those who had had autologous transplantation (1·80 [1·45-2·15] vs 1·18 [0·82-1·55]. We noted no increased risk of major haemorrhage in patients who had undergone autologous transplantation. In those with acute myeloid leukaemia, risk of non-fatal grade 4 (mostly CNS) bleeding was increased. We recorded 15 cases of non-fatal haemorrhage: four retinal in each transfusion group, and one vaginal and six cerebral in the therapeutic group. 12 patients died in the study: two from fatal cerebral haemorrhages in the therapeutic group, and ten (five in each treatment group) unrelated to major bleeding.The therapeutic strategy could become a new standard of care after autologous stem-cell transplantation; however, prophylactic platelet transfusion should remain the standard for patients with acute myeloid leukaemia. The new strategy should be used by some haematology centres only if the staff are well educated and experienced in the new approach and can react in a timely way to first signs of CNS bleeding.Deutsche Krebshilfe eV (German Cancer Aid).A randomized, controlled trial of platelet transfusions in thrombocytopenic premature infants.A multicenter prospective, randomized controlled trial was conducted to determine whether early use of platelet concentrates would reduce the incidence or extension of intracranial hemorrhage or both in sick preterm infants with thrombocytopenia. The effects on bleeding as reflected by the amount of blood product support administered and a shortened bleeding time were assessed as secondary outcomes. Premature infants with a platelet count < 150 x 10(9)/L within the first 72 hours of life were randomly assigned to receive either conventional therapy or conventional therapy plus platelet concentrates (10 ml/kg). The platelet count was maintained < 150 x 10(9)/L until day 7 of life by one to three platelet transfusions. In 22 (28%) of the 78 treated infants and 19 (26%) of the 74 control infants, either a new intracranial hemorrhage developed or an already-present one became more extensive (p = 0.73). Similar numbers of infants had each grade of intracranial hemorrhage on both initial and follow-up ultrasonography. Similar numbers of infants received fresh frozen plasma and packed red blood cells, but treated infants received less of both. The bleeding time was prolonged in the treated group before the infusion of platelet concentrates but subsequently shortened (mean difference, 79.0; 95% confidence interval, 73.1 to 84.9). Subanalysis of the control group showed that infants with platelet counts < 60 x 10(9)/L (n = 21) on at least one occasion received more fresh frozen plasma and packed red blood cells than did those with platelet counts > 60 x 10(9)/L.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)A no-prophylaxis platelet-transfusion strategy for hematologic cancers.The effectiveness of platelet transfusions to prevent bleeding in patients with hematologic cancers remains unclear. This trial assessed whether a policy of not giving prophylactic platelet transfusions was as effective and safe as a policy of providing prophylaxis.We conducted this randomized, open-label, noninferiority trial at 14 centers in the United Kingdom and Australia. Patients were randomly assigned to receive, or not to receive, prophylactic platelet transfusions when morning platelet counts were less than 10×10(9) per liter. Eligible patients were persons 16 years of age or older who were receiving chemotherapy or undergoing stem-cell transplantation and who had or were expected to have thrombocytopenia. The primary end point was bleeding of World Health Organization (WHO) grade 2, 3, or 4 up to 30 days after randomization.A total of 600 patients (301 in the no-prophylaxis group and 299 in the prophylaxis group) underwent randomization between 2006 and 2011. Bleeding of WHO grade 2, 3, or 4 occurred in 151 of 300 patients (50%) in the no-prophylaxis group, as compared with 128 of 298 (43%) in the prophylaxis group (adjusted difference in proportions, 8.4 percentage points; 90% confidence interval, 1.7 to 15.2; P=0.06 for noninferiority). Patients in the no-prophylaxis group had more days with bleeding and a shorter time to the first bleeding episode than did patients in the prophylaxis group. Platelet use was markedly reduced in the no-prophylaxis group. A prespecified subgroup analysis identified similar rates of bleeding in the two study groups among patients undergoing autologous stem-cell transplantation.The results of our study support the need for the continued use of prophylaxis with platelet transfusion and show the benefit of such prophylaxis for reducing bleeding, as compared with no prophylaxis. A significant number of patients had bleeding despite prophylaxis. (Funded by the National Health Service Blood and Transplant Research and Development Committee and the Australian Red Cross Blood Service; TOPPS Controlled-Trials.com number, ISRCTN08758735.).Prophylactic platelet transfusion in children with thrombocytopenic disorders: a retrospective review.The safety of low platelet thresholds for prophylactic transfusions was retrospectively evaluated in 673 children with various thrombocytopenic disorders. In patients with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and X linked thrombocytopenia the threshold for the use of platelet transfusion was based on bleeding events rather than platelet count. In children with hypoproliferative thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, prophylactic platelet transfusions were used when the platelet count was <or= 5000/microl in stable patients and > 10,000/microl in cases of bleeding or infections. The restrictive policy of platelet transfusions was shown to be proved safe in many thrombocytopenic disorders.Risk of bleeding and use of platelet transfusions in patients with hematologic malignancies: recurrent event analysis.A recent randomized trial (TOPPS) compared prophylactic platelet transfusions (for counts <10×10(9)/L) with a strategy of no-prophylaxis in adults with hematologic malignancies. Seventy percent of enrolled patients received an autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Statistical models were developed to explore which patient factors or clinical characteristics are important prognostic factors for bleeding. These models were presented for baseline characteristics and for recurrent analysis of bleeding to assess the risks of World Health Organization grade 2-4 bleeding on any given day. Additional analyses explored the importance of fever. Treatment plan (chemotherapy/allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant), female sex, and treatment arm (no-prophylaxis) were significantly associated with an increased number of days of bleeding. The number of days with a platelet count <10×109/L was significantly associated with a grade 2-4 bleed (P<0.0001). Patients with a temperature of at least 38°C had the highest hazard of a grade 2-4 bleed (hazard ratio: 1.7, 95% confidence interval: 1.3 to 2.4, compared with the risk in patients with a temperature <37.5°C). There was no evidence that minor bleeding predicted a grade 2-4 bleed. The results highlighted the limited role of correction of thrombocytopenia by platelet transfusion in reducing the risk of bleeding. Clinically stable patients undergoing autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation had the lowest risk of bleeding and benefited least from prophylactic platelet transfusions. Prospective studies are required to address the usefulness of risk factors to support better targeted platelet transfusions. TOPPS Controlled-Trials.com number ISRCTN08758735.