Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia comorbid with COPD is feasible with preliminary evidence of positive sleep and fatigue effects.Many people with COPD report difficulties falling asleep or staying asleep, insufficient sleep duration, or nonrestorative sleep. Cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) has proved effective not only in people with primary insomnia but also in people with insomnia comorbid with psychiatric and medical illness (eg, depression, cancer, and chronic pain). However, CBT-I has rarely been tested in those with COPD who have disease-related features that interfere with sleep and may lessen the effectiveness of such therapies. The purpose of this study was to determine the feasibility of applying a CBT-I intervention for people with COPD and to assess the impact of CBT-I on insomnia severity and sleep-related outcomes, fatigue, mood, and daytime functioning.The study had two phases. In Phase 1, a 6-weekly session CBT-I intervention protocol in participants with COPD was assessed to examine feasibility and acceptability. Phase 2 was a small trial utilizing a prospective two-group pre- and post-test design with random assignment to the six-session CBT-I or a six-session wellness education (WE) program to determine the effects of each intervention, with both interventions being provided by a nurse behavioral sleep medicine specialist.Fourteen participants (five in Phase 1 and nine in Phase 2) completed six sessions of CBT-I and nine participants completed six sessions of WE. Participants indicated that both interventions were acceptable. Significant positive treatment-related effects of the CBT-I intervention were noted for insomnia severity (P = 0.000), global sleep quality (P = 0.002), wake after sleep onset (P = 0.03), sleep efficiency (P = 0.02), fatigue (P = 0.005), and beliefs and attitudes about sleep (P = 0.000). Significant positive effects were noted for depressed mood after WE (P = 0.005).Results suggest that using CBT-I in COPD is feasible and the outcomes compare favorably with those obtained in older adults with insomnia in the context of other chronic illnesses.Patient Anxiety and Depression Moderate the Effects of Increased Self-management Knowledge on Physical Activity: A Secondary Analysis of a Randomised Controlled Trial on Health-Mentoring in COPD.Anxiety and depression are common comorbidities in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). While these comorbidities could potentially lead to a higher motivation to learn about self-management, they could also inhibit patients from translating this knowledge into appropriate self-management behaviours. This paper explores the moderating effects of anxiety and depression on a health-mentoring intervention, focusing on mechanisms of change (mediation).182 COPD patients participated in an RCT, with anxiety and depression assessed by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), self-management knowledge by the Partners in Health Scale, and spontaneous physical activity using accelerometers, all measured at baseline, 6 and 12 months. The moderated mediation model tested the intervention's effect on physical activity, mediated via changes in self-management knowledge, at different levels of anxiety and depression.Knowledge mediated the effect of the intervention on changes in physical activity only for participants reporting low levels of anxiety or depression. Both acted as moderators: Increased knowledge led to more physical activity among participants reporting low anxiety or depression and to less activity among highly anxious or depressed participants.Although health-mentoring interventions can be an effective tool to increase knowledge and physical activity among COPD patients, it is essential to take anxiety and depression into account, as increased knowledge may have detrimental effects in highly anxious or depressed participants. This suggests that patients with elevated anxiety or depression may need to be treated appropriately before engaging in chronic disease self-management interventions.Psychological and cognitive outcomes of a randomized trial of exercise among patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.Exercise rehabilitation is recommended increasingly for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). This study examined the effect of exercise and education on 79 older adults (M age = 66.6 +/- 6.5 years; 53% female) with COPD, randomly assigned to 10 weeks of (a) exercise, education, and stress management (EXESM; n = 29); (b) education and stress management (ESM; n = 25); or (c) waiting list (WL; n = 25). EXESM included 37 sessions of exercise, 16 educational lectures, and 10 weekly stress management classes. ESM included only the 16 lectures and 10 stress management classes. Before and after the intervention, assessments were conducted of physiological functioning (pulmonary function, exercise endurance), psychological well-being (depression, anxiety, quality of life), and cognitive functioning (attention, motor speed, mental efficiency, verbal processing). Repeated measures multivariate analysis of variance indicated that EXESM participants experienced changes not observed among ESM and WL participants, including improved endurance, reduced anxiety, and improved cognitive performance (verbal fluency).Effects of an uncertainty management intervention on uncertainty, anxiety, depression, and quality of life of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease outpatients.In this controlled, randomized study we explored the effects of an uncertainty management intervention on uncertainty, anxiety, depression, and quality of life (QOL) of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) outpatients in China. Ninety-six COPD outpatients completed the study (n = 49 in the intervention group; n = 47 in the control group). Over the 10-month study duration, the intervention group received a cognitive behavioral intervention. Compared with the control group, the intervention group showed significant improvement in uncertainty, coping strategy, anxiety, depression, and the mental health domains of QOL after the intervention, providing the first evidence that uncertainty management can improve the emotional status and QOL of COPD outpatients.One session cognitive behavioural therapy for elderly patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.We hypothesized that compared to an educational intervention, a single 2 h session of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), with 6-week follow-up, would reduce anxiety and depression, improve physical and mental functioning, and lead to a better quality of life and greater satisfaction with treatment in older patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).Fifty-six subjects were recruited from a large, urban, academically affiliated Veterans Affairs (VA) Hospital, a non-profit private hospital, and a local newspaper, for a single blind randomized controlled clinical trial. One 2 h session of group CBT was designed to reduce symptoms of anxiety, with specific components including relaxation training, cognitive interventions, and graduated practice, followed by homework and weekly calls for 6 weeks. This was compared to a group that received 2 h of COPD education, followed by weekly calls. Pre- and post-intervention subjects in both groups were administered SF-36, Geriatric Depression Scale, Beck Anxiety Inventory, 6 min walk test, and the FEV-1. Following the intervention, both groups completed the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire.When compared with a group that received education about COPD, 2 h CBT group showed decreased depression and anxiety. Contrary to our hypothesis, despite the decrease in depression and anxiety, there was no change in the physical functioning of the patients.Twenty to 40% of patients with COPD have high levels of anxiety and depression. Our study finds that as little as 2 h of CBT administered in a group setting is able to reduce these anxious and depressive symptoms.The impact of telephone-delivered cognitive behaviour therapy and befriending on mood disorders in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A randomized controlled trial.The main objectives of this pragmatic randomized controlled trial were to investigate the impact of cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) and an active social control (befriending) on depression and anxiety symptoms in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).Eligible participants were randomly allocated to receive eight weekly telephone interventions of CBT (n = 54) or befriending (n = 56). Repeated-measures ANOVA was used to assess changes in scores and Cohen's d was used to assess effect sizes.Significant improvement was observed in anxiety symptoms for the befriending group from baseline (T1) to post-intervention assessment (T2) and to 8-week follow-up assessment (T3), with a small to medium effect size (Cohen's d = 0.3). Significant improvement was noted in depression symptoms from T1 to T2 for both groups, but only the CBT group had a significant difference at T3, with a small to medium effect size (Cohen's d = 0.4). For secondary outcomes, there was a significant change in COPD symptoms from T1 to T2 for the befriending group; however, at T3 this change was no longer significant. Finally, there was a significant change in general self-efficacy for both groups between T1 and T2, and T1 and T3.Cognitive behaviour therapy reduced depression symptoms but not anxiety. Befriending reduced depression symptoms in the short term and anxiety symptoms in both the short term and long term. Further research is needed to demonstrate non-inferiority of telephone delivery compared with other formats, and to understand the impact of befriending which has the potential to be a cost-effective support for people with COPD. Statement of contribution What is already known on this subject? Depression and anxiety are common comorbidities in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Mood disorders are not commonly routinely treated in people with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Telephone-administered CBT has been shown to be as effective as face-to-face CBT in reducing depression and anxiety. What does this study add? Telephone-administered CBT can reduce depression symptoms in people with COPD. Telephone-administered befriending can reduce anxiety and depression symptoms in people with COPD. People with COPD who have mood disorders would prefer to have CBT than befriending.Study protocol for a randomized controlled trial of telephone-delivered cognitive behavior therapy compared with befriending for treating depression and anxiety in older adults with COPD.COPD is an umbrella term to describe chronic lung diseases that cause limitations in lung airflow, including emphysema and chronic bronchitis. The prevalence of depression and anxiety in people with COPD is high, although these comorbidities are often undiagnosed, untreated, or undertreated. There is a need to identify efficacious treatments for depression and anxiety in people with COPD. Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) for the treatment of anxiety and depression has a strong evidence base. There has been some success delivering this treatment over the telephone in limited studies. The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy of both telephone-administered CBT and befriending on outcomes for patients with diagnosed COPD who have at least mild levels of depression and/or anxiety.The protocol described in this paper is of a pragmatic randomized controlled trial comparing eight sessions of telephone CBT to an active social control, referred to as befriending. Primary outcome measures will include depression and anxiety symptoms, and secondary outcome measures will include quality of life, self-efficacy, and COPD symptom severity. Participants' satisfaction with the intervention and therapeutic alliance will also be assessed. Measures will be taken pre- and postdelivery of the intervention and again at 8 weeks following the intervention.People with COPD often have limitations to their mobility because of their breathlessness. They are often already attending many medical appointments and could be reluctant to attend for face-to-face psychological treatment. The results of this study should identify the relative efficacy of CBT delivered over the telephone to this population, which, if successful, may be a cost-effective and more palatable alternative to face-to-face treatment of depression or anxiety for this population.A randomized controlled trial of the effect of psychotherapy on anxiety and depression in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.To assess the effect of psychotherapy on the anxiety and depression levels of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).A blind, randomized, controlled trial.Outpatient university pulmonary rehabilitation program in Brazil.Thirty patients with COPD (mean age, 60.33y; 22 men) attending a pulmonary rehabilitation program were randomized into 2 groups: experimental group (G1) and control group (G2). Both groups underwent a 12-week treatment program.Group 1 (n=14) participated in 24 sessions of physical exercise, 24 sessions of physiotherapy, 12 psychologic sessions, and 3 educational sessions. Group 2 did not participate in psychotherapy sessions.All patients were evaluated at baseline and at completion of the pulmonary rehabilitation program by using 3 instruments: the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI), Beck Depression Inventory (BDI), and 6-minute walk distance (6MWD).Both groups showed statistically significant improvements on the 6MWD (G1, P<.001; G2, P=.03). Only G1 had a significant reduction in anxiety and depression levels (G1: BAI, P<.001; BDI, P<.001; G2: BAI, P=.156; BDI, P=.142). Statistically significant differences existed between G1 and G2 for BAI (P<.001) and BDI (P=.02).Including psychotherapy in a pulmonary rehabilitation program for COPD reduced patients' anxiety and depression levels but did not modify 6MWD performance.The effect of nurse-led problem-solving therapy on coping, self-efficacy and depressive symptoms for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial.to examine the effects of nurse-led, problem-solving therapy (PST) on coping, self-efficacy and depressive symptoms for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) using a randomised controlled trial.a total of 254 patients with COPD were recruited, screened and randomly allocated into the intervention group with nurse-led PST or the comparison group with usual care. A total of 151 patients (intervention = 78 and comparison = 73) completed the study for 6 months.the nurse-led PST was an individualised and patient-centred intervention to improve patients' problem-solving skills related to symptom management and lifestyle modification. Twelve telephone-based PST sessions were provided to the intervention group, while the control group received usual care from their primary care providers.there were no group differences of post-test scores in problem-oriented coping, self-efficacy and depressive symptoms between the two groups. However, despite the lack of group differences, the nurse-led PST was effective for clinically depressed patients with COPD, who experienced decreased depressive symptoms (mean difference = 6.8, P = 0.009) and increased self-efficacy (mean difference = -0.6, P = 0.041) in the intervention group (n = 12).the nurse-led PST offered to patients with COPD did not demonstrate any different effects compared with usual care over 6 months; however, a subgroup analysis with clinically depressed subjects showed improved self-efficacy and decreased depressive symptoms in the intervention group.Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a minimal psychological intervention to reduce non-severe depression in chronically ill elderly patients: the design of a randomised controlled trial [ISRCTN92331982].Depression is a prevalent disorder in chronically ill elderly persons. It may decrease quality of life, and increase functional disability, medical costs, and healthcare utilisation. Because patients may slip into a downward spiral, early recognition and treatment of depression is important. Depression can be treated with antidepressants or psychological interventions; the latter can also be applied by trained paraprofessionals. In this paper, we describe the design of the DELTA study (Depression in Elderly with Long-Term Afflictions). The first objective of the DELTA study is to evaluate the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of a minimal psychological intervention (MPI) to reduce depression in chronically ill elderly patients. The second objective is to evaluate whether a potential effect of the MPI may differ between types of chronic illnesses. The tailor-made intervention is administered by nurses, who are trained in the principles of cognitive behavioural therapy and self-management.DELTA is a two-armed randomised controlled trial, comparing MPI to usual care. A total number of 180 patients with diabetes mellitus type II (DM) and 180 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), who in addition suffer from non-severe depression, will be included in the study. In our study, non-severe depression is defined as having minor depression, mild major depression or moderate major depression. The primary outcome measure is depression using the Beck Depression Inventory. Secondary outcome measures include quality of life, daily functioning, self-efficacy, autonomy, and participation. In the economic evaluation, cost-effectiveness and cost-utility ratios will be calculated. Furthermore, a process evaluation will be carried out. Analyses will include both univariate and multivariate techniques and according to the intention to treat principle. The economic evaluation will be done from a societal perspective and data of the process evaluation will be analysed using descriptive techniques.A total number of 361 patients has been included in the study. All interventions have been administered and follow-up data will be complete in September 2006. Preliminary results from the process evaluation indicate that patients' satisfaction with the intervention is high. If this intervention proves to be effective, implementation of the DELTA intervention is considered and anticipated.Effects of psychotherapy in moderately severe COPD: a pilot study.Anxiety is common in the "pink puffer" syndrome associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The degree of anxiety correlates well with perceived dyspnoea. This pilot study examines the effect of group psychotherapy on anxiety, exercise tolerance, dyspnoea and quality of life. Ten patients with moderately severe, stable COPD (mean forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1)-1.15 L) had six 90 min sessions of cognitive and behavioural psychotherapy at weekly intervals. Patients completed the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS), Medical Research Council Questionnaire (MRCQ) and St George's Respiratory Questionnaires (SGRQ), 1 week before and after therapy. FEV1, forced vital capacity (FVC), slow vital capacity (SVC), blood gas tensions and 6 min walking distance (6MWD) were measured. Eight control patients attended weekly for lung function and 6MWD for 6 weeks, but had no psychotherapy. Mean baseline HADS score was significantly higher in the psychotherapy group (12) than in controls (7), but otherwise there were no differences in lung function, blood gas tensions, 6MWD, or the other questionnaire scores between groups. After treatment, the physiological and psychological parameters where unchanged in both groups with the exception of the mean 6MWD, which had improved in the psychotherapy group only, from 351 to 423 m (p<0.001), an increase of 24%. Three months after treatment, the 6MWD was still 16% above the baseline value (p=0.02). In conclusion, six sessions of cognitive and behavioural psychotherapy produced a sustained improvement in exercise tolerance in a group of 10 anxious patients with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, without any change in anxiety scores on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. Further studies of more prolonged, intensive psychotherapy would establish whether better symptom and quality of life scores accompany more dramatic increases in exercise tolerance in "pink puffers".'The COPD breathlessness manual': a randomised controlled trial to test a cognitive-behavioural manual versus information booklets on health service use, mood and health status, in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a costly long-term condition associated with frequent Accident and Emergency (A&E) and hospital admissions. Psychological difficulties and inadequate self-management can amplify this picture.To compare a cognitive-behavioural manual versus information booklets (IB) on health service use, mood and health status.Two hundred and twenty-two COPD patients were randomly allocated to receive either the COPD breathlessness manual (CM) or IB. They were instructed to work through their programme at home, over 5 weeks. Guidance from a facilitator was provided at an initial home visit plus two telephone call follow-ups.After 12 months, total A&E visits had reduced by 42% in the CM group, compared with a 16% rise in the IB group. The odds of people in the IB group attending A&E 12 months post-intervention was 1.9 times higher than for the CM group (CI 1.05-3.53). Reduction in hospital admissions and bed days were greatest in the CM group. At 6 months, there were significantly greater improvements in anxiety (F (2,198)=5.612, P=0.004), depression (F (1.8,176.1)=10.697, P⩽0.001) and dyspnoea (F (2,198)=18.170, P⩽0.001) in the CM group. Estimated savings at 12 months were greatest in the CM group, amounting to £30k or £270 per participant.The COPD manual, which addresses physical and mental health, is a straightforward cost-effective intervention that is worth offering to COPD patients within primary or secondary care.Effectiveness of cognitive behavioural therapy in a community-based pulmonary rehabilitation programme: A controlled clinical trial.To investigate whether the use of cognitive behavioural therapy in pulmonary rehabilitation addresses the depression and anxiety burden and thereby improves rehabilitation outcomes.Prospective controlled clinical trial.A total of 70 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who were referred to a community centre for pulmonary rehabilitation.Patients were allocated to either the control group, consisting of pulmonary rehabilitation alone, or to the treatment group, receiving pulmonary rehabilitation and an additional 6 sessions of group-based cognitive behavioural therapy. Assessments consisting of questionnaires and walk tests were conducted pre- and post-pulmonary rehabilitation.A total of 28 patients were enrolled. The cognitive behavioural therapy group had significant improvements in exercise capacity following pulmonary rehabilitation (mean change 32.9 m, p = 0.043), which was maintained at 3 months post-pulmonary rehabilitation (mean change 23.4 m, p = 0.045). Patients in the cognitive behavioural therapy group showed significant short-term improvements in fatigue, stress and depression (mean change 2.4, p = 0.016, 3.9, p = 0.024 and 4.3, p = 0.047, respectively) and a 3-month post-pulmonary rehabilitation improvement in anxiety score (mean change 3.1, p = 0.01). No significant changes were seen in the control group.The addition of cognitive behavioural therapy improved patients' physical, psychological and quality of life results. Cognitive behavioural therapy should be considered for inclusion in a pulmonary rehabilitation programme to enhance outcomes.A randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and depression in COPD.Previous research indicates a high prevalence of untreated anxiety and depression in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The current study examined the effect of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in groups for co-morbid, clinically significant anxiety and depression in COPD outpatients of both sexes.In a randomized, controlled trial, CBT (n = 25) was compared with enhanced standard care (n = 26). Participants in both conditions were followed up at 2 and 8 months from baseline. Main outcome measures comprised the Beck Anxiety Inventory and the Beck Depression Inventory-II. Measures of health status and sleep were included as secondary outcomes. The effects of sex and age were also investigated.CBT resulted in improvement in symptoms of anxiety and depression, with effect sizes of 1.1 and 0.9 at post-treatment, respectively. The improvement was maintained at the 8-month follow-up, with effect sizes of 1.4 and 0.9. In the control group, there was no significant change. Compared to men, women had higher symptom levels throughout the whole study period. Younger patients had more anxiety and depression, age had also differential effects in the two groups on change in depressive symptoms. Changes in sleep and health status were small in both groups.The findings indicate that CBT may provide rapid symptom relief for COPD patients with clinically significant anxiety and depression, and underline the need for integrating mental health care into the overall medical regimen for COPD.COPD education and cognitive behavioral therapy group treatment for clinically significant symptoms of depression and anxiety in COPD patients: a randomized controlled trial.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) affects 14 to 20 million Americans and is associated with increased prevalence of affective disorders, contributing significantly to disability. This study compared cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) group treatment for anxiety and depression with COPD education for COPD patients with moderate-to-severe anxiety and/or depressive symptoms.A randomized controlled trial (RCT) was conducted between 11 July 2002 and 30 April 2005 at the Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX. Participants were 238 patients treated for COPD the year before, with forced expiratory value in 1 second (FEV)1/forced vital capacity (FVC)<70% and FEV1<70% predicted, and symptoms of moderate anxiety and/or moderate depression, who were being treated by a primary care provider or pulmonologist. Participants attended eight sessions of CBT or COPD education. Assessments were at baseline, at 4 and 8 weeks, and 4, 8 and 12 months. Primary outcomes were disease-specific and generic quality of life (QoL) [Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire (CRQ) and Medical Outcomes Survey Short Form-36 (SF-36) respectively]. Secondary outcomes were anxiety [Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI)], depressive symptoms [Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II)], 6-minute walk distance (6MWD) and use of health services.Both treatments significantly improved QoL, anxiety and depression (p<0.005) over 8 weeks; the rate of change did not differ between groups. Improvements were maintained with no significant change during follow-up. Ratios of post- to pretreatment use of health services were equal to 1 for both groups.CBT group treatment and COPD education can achieve sustainable improvements in QoL for COPD patients experiencing moderate-to-severe symptoms of depression or anxiety.Cognitive behaviour therapy reduces dyspnoea ratings in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).There is evidence that psychological factors contribute to the perception of increased difficulty of breathing in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and increase morbidity. We tested the hypothesis that cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) decreases ratings of perceived dyspnoea in response to resistive loading in patients with COPD. From 31 patients with COPD, 18 were randomised to four sessions of specifically targeted CBT and 13 to routine care. Prior to randomisation, participants were tested with an inspiratory external resistive load protocol (loads between 5 and 45cmH2O/L/s). Six months later, we re-measured perceived dyspnoea in response to the same inspiratory resistive loads and compared results to measurements prior to randomisation. There was a significant 17% reduction in dyspnoea ratings across the loads for the CBT group, and no reduction for the routine care group. The decrease in ratings of dyspnoea suggests that CBT to alleviate breathing discomfort may have a role in the routine treatment of people with COPD.