Adenomatous polyp in the gallbladder.Can endoscopic ultrasonography differentiate nonneoplastic from neoplastic gallbladder polyps?The present study aimed to clarify the endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) features of nonneoplastic (cholesterol polyps and adenomyomatosis) and neoplastic (adenoma and adenocarcinoma) gallbladder polyps and to evaluate the effectiveness and limitation of EUS in the differential diagnosis of these lesions. We retrospectively compared EUS images with histologic findings in 29 surgical cases with gallbladder polyps with a diameter of 10 to 20 mm. Those cases were indicated for surgery based on the findings of a sessile appearance, a solitary lesion, low echogenicity, and/or a lobulated surface. Six of 10 cholesterol polyps were atypically seen as partially or completely hypoechoic due to predominant proliferation of glandular epithelia. Nine of 10 cholesterol polyps demonstrated an aggregation of hyperechoic spots, which represented multiple granules of cholesterosis. All adenomyomatoses (n = 10) showed multiple microcysts, which corresponded to proliferated Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses. However, three of nine neoplastic lesions (three adenomas and six adenocarcinomas) showed one of these signs due to concomitant cholesterosis (n = 2) or proliferated Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses (n = 1). In conclusion, 69% (20/29) of gallbladder polyps larger than 10 mm that were preoperatively suspected of malignancy were nonneoplastic. An aggregation of hyperechoic spots and multiple microcysts are considered to be important predictive factors for cholesterol polyps and adenomyomatosis, respectively. However, we should caution that these findings can also occur in neoplastic polyps when they contain a concomitant nonneoplastic component (cholesterosis or proliferated Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses).Comparison of surgically resected polypoid lesions of the gallbladder to their pre-operative ultrasound characteristics.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLG) have been a common finding on ultrasound examinations of the abdomen and are more prevalent since our use of equipment incorporating pulse shaping increased bandwidth, and enhanced phase use for image reconstruction began in 1996. Our study correlates the pre-operative ultrasonographic findings of these lesions to the surgically resected specimen with specific regard to identifying neoplastic polyps.A retrospective review was performed of 130 patients who had a pre-operative ultrasound of the gallbladder and subsequently underwent cholecystectomy between August 1996 and July 2007 at the Mayo Clinic Rochester.Seventy-nine pseudopolyps (cholesterol polyps, inflammatory polyps, and adenomyomas) and 15 neoplastic polyps were identified on histopathologic analysis. However, 36 patients (27%) did not have a PLG upon histopathologic analysis. Thirty-one polyps had suspicious ultrasonographic characteristics for neoplastic changes. Twenty-nine were > or = 10 mm, 12 had vascularity, and one demonstrated invasion. Of these, there were 23 pseudopolyps and six true polyps with neoplastic changes on final pathology (four dysplastic adenomas and two adenocarcinomas). Three asymptomatic polyps < or = 10 mm (4%) in maximum diameter based on pre-operative ultrasound imaging (US) had neoplastic changes at pathology (two dysplastic adenomas and one adenocarcinoma). Several statistically significant risk factors were identified that increased the likelihood for malignancy in a PLG: history of primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), local invasion, vascularity, and > or = 6 mm maximum diameter based on pre-operative US. Of PLGs < or = 10 mm, 7.4% were neoplastic. Twenty-five patients were followed up with at least two serial ultrasound examinations. Of these, seven demonstrated polyp growth. None of these specimens demonstrated neoplastic changes. The positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for ultrasound diagnosing neoplastic changes based on current criteria was 28.5% and 93.1%, respectively, with a false negative rate of 5.0%. Expanding the criteria to include cholecystectomy for PLGs > or = 6 mm changes the positive predictive value and negative predictive value to 18.5% and 100%, respectively, with a false negative rate of 0%.Histopathologic analysis of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder continues to be the gold standard to identify malignancy. Ultrasound has been used extensively in the pre-operative management of these lesions, but modern ultrasound techniques are unable to differentiate between benign and malignant PLGs with any certainty. We recommend that strong consideration be given to surgical resection of PLGs > or = 6 mm based on pre-operative US due to the significant risk of neoplasm. Additionally, PLGs in all patients with PSC, any patient in whom diligent long-term follow-up cannot be completed, and lesions that demonstrate growth, vascularity, invasion, or are symptomatic require cholecystectomy.[Diagnostic imaging of focal lesions in the gallbladder wall. Pathology, differential diagnosis, therapeutic consequences].Risk factors for gallbladder polyps in the Chinese population.To assess the prevalence of and risk factors for gallbladder (GB) polyps in the Chinese population.A prospective ultrasonographic study of GB polyps was conducted in 3647 Chinese subjects who received a paid physical checkup at this hospital. Their demographic characteristics and biochemical parameters were recorded. Ultrasonographic diagnosis revealed a normal GB in 2946 subjects (1838 men, 1108 women), polyps in 243 (174 men, 69 women), gallstones in 286 (196 men, 90 women), a history of cholecystectomy in 100 (56 men, 44 women), mixed gallstones/GB polyps in 17 (10 men, seven women), and miscellaneous results in 35.Excluding subjects with cholecystectomy and mixed gallstones/GB polyps, the overall prevalence of GB polyps in the study group was 6.9%. The studied risk factors manifesting an increased odds ratio (OR) for the development of GB polyps were glucose intolerance (OR 1.506, p < 0.05) and male gender (OR 1.723, p < 0.05) in multivariate analysis. Other demographic characteristics and biochemical parameters, such as age, body mass index, cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, blood pressure, lipid profile, hepatitis B virus carrier, liver function, and parity, did not exhibit any correlation to GB polyps.Among Chinese of higher socioeconomic status, men and individuals with glucose intolerance tend to have a high risk for developing GB polyps.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder encompass a wide variety of pathology. Although most of these lesions are benign, some early carcinomas of the gallbladder do present as polypoid lesions. Problems remain in selecting patients with polypoid lesions of the gallbladder for surgery, the operative approach, and the method of follow-up of those deemed not needing surgery.This review was done by Medline search of the English literature by the keywords "polypoid lesions of gallbladder," "gallbladder polyps," "carcinoma of gallbladder," and "benign tumors of gallbladder."Most small polypoid lesions of the gallbladder are benign and remain static for years. Three- to six-monthly ultrasonography examination is warranted in the initial follow-up period but it is probably unnecessary after 1 or 2 years. Age more than 50 years and size of polyp more than 1 cm are the two most important factors predicting malignancy in polypoid lesions of the gallbladder. Other risk factors include concurrent gallstones, solitary polyp, and symptomatic polyp. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the treatment of choice unless the suspicion of malignancy is high, in which case it is advisable to have open exploration, intraoperative frozen section, and preparation for extended resection.Natural history of polypoid lesions in the gall bladder.Although polypoid lesions of the gall bladder are frequently observed in asymptomatic subjects, the natural history of these lesions has never been studied using ultrasonography.The natural history of polypoid lesions of the gall bladder was investigated using ultrasonography.Among 4343 patients who presented to the outpatient clinic of Tsuchiura Kyodo General Hospital in 1988, 111 subjects were diagnosed as having polypoid lesions of the gall bladder by ultrasonography. Among these patients, two had gall bladder carcinoma. The remaining 109 subjects (58 female; age: median 54, range 25-89) were enrolled in this study.The subjects were followed up by ultrasonography once or twice a year until 1994.Four patients received cholecystectomy and two patients died of other causes during the observation period. In one patient, gall bladder carcinoma was found, but its location was different from that of the pre-existing polyp. The size of the lesions did not change in 88.3% of the other 130 patients during this period, even among those in whom the initial size of the lesion exceeded 10 mm. There was no apparent correlation between the change in the diameter of the polypoid lesions and patients' sex or age.Most polypoid lesions of the gall bladder detected by ultrasonography are benign.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: diagnosis and indications for surgery.One hundred and eighty-two patients with an ultrasonographic and/or pathological diagnosis of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLG) were reviewed to determine the reliability of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of PLG and the indications for operation in this disease. Of the 182 patients operated on, PLG were demonstrated by the gross appearance of the resected gallbladder in 172. Histologically benign lesions were present in 159 gallbladders and malignant lesions in 13. Cholesterol polyps accounted for most benign PLG. The sensitivity of ultrasonography in detecting PLG was 90.1 per cent, significantly higher than that of oral cholecystography, computed tomography or endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (P less than 0.01). The specificity of ultrasonography in the diagnosis of PLG was 93.9 per cent. Therefore, ultrasonography is a highly sensitive method for investigating PLG, and the preoperative diagnosis of PLG in this unit has now become entirely dependent on this technique. The size and number of PLG, the presence of gallstones and the patient's age all correlate with the nature of PLG, and these features are helpful in differentiating malignant from benign lesions before operation. Surgical treatment is indicated when PLG exceed 1.0 cm in diameter, when PLG are single in number, when PLG are associated with gallstones, when patients with PLG are over the age of 50 years, or when clinical symptoms of PLG are apparent."Adenomatous polyps of the gallbladder" adenomas of the gallbladder.The finding of adenomatous polyps of the gallbladder is a rare occurrence and an unusual clinical problem. Among 2,145 patients who underwent cholecystectomy for gallbladder disease only 9 (0.4 per cent) presented with adenomatous polyps. There were 6 women and 3 men, aged 17 to 70 years. Preoperative ultrasonographic diagnosis was made in only 1 of 7 patients with gallstones, in contrast polypoid lesions within a gallbladder without stones were easily confirmed by both ultrasonography and oral cholecystography in the remaining 2 patients. All polyps were 1.0 cm or less in size and without histologic evidence of malignant change. The clinical significance of this rare condition is discussed, with particular reference to a possible role in development of gallbladder carcinoma. Surgical treatment should be advocated regardless of clinical manifestation when the polyp exceeds 1.0 cm in diameter or rapid growth of the lesion is seen on ultrasonographic follow-up examinations.Endoscopic ultrasonography does not differentiate neoplastic from non-neoplastic small gallbladder polyps.To assess the ability of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) to differentiate neoplastic from non-neoplastic polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLGs).The uses of EUS and transabdominal ultrasonography (US) were retrospectively analyzed in 94 surgical cases of gallbladder polyps less than 20 mm in diameter.The prevalence of neoplastic lesions with a diameter of 5-10 mm was 17.2% (10/58); 11-15 mm, 15.4% (4/26), and 16-20 mm, 50% (5/10). The overall diagnostic accuracies of EUS and US for small PLGs were 80.9% and 63.9% (P < 0.05), respectively. EUS correctly distinguished 12 (63.2%) of 19 neoplastic PLGs but was less accurate for polyps less than 1.0 cm (4/10, 40%) than for polyps greater than 1.0 cm (8/9, 88.9%) (P = 0.02).Although EUS was more accurate than US, its accuracy for differentiating neoplastic from non-neoplastic PLGs less than 1.0 cm was low. Thus, EUS alone is not sufficient for determining a treatment strategy for PLGs of less than 1.0 cm.Diagnosis and treatment of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: report of 194 cases.With the wide use of B-ultrasonography in recent years, the polypoid lesion of the gallbladder (PLG) has been one of the most common diseases detected in biliary surgery. This study was to investigate the diagnostic method and operative indications of PLG.The clinical and pathological data of 194 patients with PLG who had received operation at our hospital from January 1994 to September 2002 were analyzed retrospectively. Categorized data were analyzed by the chi-square test.All the patients received preoperative B-ultrasonography. 185 of the 194 PLG patients were diagnosed as having cholecystic polyp, and 9 adenomas. Among the 42 patients who received CT, 6 showed early gallbladder cancer. Pathologically, cholesterol polyps were mostly multiple lesions (64.7%) with a mean diameter of 3.86+/-2.2 mm in 136 patients. Of 16 patients with adenomas, 10 had a tumor diameter of more than 10 mm (62.5%). In 11 patients with gallbladder carcinoma, 7 were accompanied with gallbladder stone (63.6%). In addition, inflammatory polyps and adenomyomas were found in 25 and 6 patients respectively.B-ultrasonography is the most effective diagnostic method for detecting PLG. When large or irregular lesions are found, CT should be performed in order to avoid missing of gallbladder carcinoma. Operative indications for PLG include: a maximal tumor diameter of more than 10 mm; an over 50-year-old patient with a widebase and a single polyp lesion; a wide-base lesion or a lesion showing a tendency to enlargement; co-existing gallbladder stone or cholecystitis; a patient without other diseases but obvious clinical features and failure of general management; big or long pedicels or polyps at the neck of the gallbladder for preventing the empty of the gallbladder and a history of biliary colic; and PLG with irregularly thickened local gallbladder wall.Is gall-bladder polyp equivalent to cancer? An analysis of material from 1196 cholecystectomies--a comparison of the ultrasound and histopathological results.Polyps of the gall-bladder has long been a serious diagnostic problem. Their detection in routine ultrasound is not yet satisfactory and often does not allow you to select the proper method of operating the gall-bladder. The aim of the study was to assess the accuracy of ultrasound diagnosis of polypoid lesions of the gall-bladder through its verification by histopathology in patients treated with cholecystectomy.In the years 2010-2013, 1196 patients underwent surgery due to diseases of the gall-bladder at the Department of General and Transplant Surgery, Medical University in Łódź. The study evaluated the sensitivity of ultrasound in detecting polyps of the gallbladder and histopathological findings of the formulations investigated.Preoperative ultrasound examination (USG) revealed a polypoid lesion in 64 patients; only in 29 of them (44.6%) this diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological examination. In the other cases, cholecystolithiasis or inflammatory lesions were found. The most common histopathological findings included cholesterol polyps, adenomatous polyps, and inflammatory polyps. Malignant lesions (gall-bladder cancer) were found in five patients preoperatively diagnosed with a polypoid lesion, i.e 7.8% of patients preoperatively diagnosed with a polyp and 0.4% of all patients who received surgical treatment. Patients qualified for surgery due to polyps diagnosed by means of ultrasound examination constitued 5.4% of all patients who underwent cholecystectomy. On histopathological examination, the presence of polyps was confirmed in 2.4% patients treated with excision of the gall-bladder.Detection of gall-bladder polyp on ultrasound examination is an indication for cholecystectomy, in particular when the polyp diameter exceeds 10 mm. In each case of a polyp, cholecystolithiasis should also be taken into account and the presence (or absence) of indications for cholecystectomy should be discussed with the patient.Contrast-enhanced ultrasound in diagnosis of gallbladder adenoma.Gallbladder adenoma is a pre-cancerous neoplasm and needs surgical resection. It is difficult to differentiate adenoma from other gallbladder polyps using imaging examinations. The study aimed to illustrate characteristics of contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) and its diagnostic value in gallbladder adenoma.Thirty-seven patients with 39 gallbladder adenomatoid lesions (maximal diameter ≥10 mm and without metastasis) were enrolled in this study. Lesion appearances in conventional ultrasound and CEUS were documented. The imaging features were compared individually among gallbladder cholesterol polyp, gallbladder adenoma and malignant lesion.Adenoma lesions showed iso-echogenicity in ultrasound, and an eccentric enhancement pattern, "fast-in and synchronous-out" contrast enhancement pattern and homogeneous at peak-time enhancement in CEUS. The homogenicity at peak-time enhancement showed the highest diagnostic ability in differentiating gallbladder adenoma from cholesterol polyps. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, accuracy and Youden index were 100%, 90.9%, 92.9%, 100%, 95.8% and 0.91, respectively. The characteristic of continuous gallbladder wall shown by CEUS had the highest diagnostic ability in differentiating adenoma from malignant lesion (100%, 86.7%, 86.7%, 100%, 92.9% and 0.87, respectively). The characteristic of the eccentric enhancement pattern had the highest diagnostic ability in differentiating adenoma from cholesterol polyp and malignant lesion, with corresponding indices of 69.2%, 88.5%, 75.0%, 85.2%, 82.1% and 0.58, respectively.CEUS is valuable in differentiating gallbladder adenoma from other gallbladder polyps (≥10 mm in diameter). Homogeneous echogenicity on peak-time enhancement, a continuous gallbladder wall, and the eccentric enhancement pattern are important indicators of gallbladder adenoma on CEUS.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: report of 100 cases with special reference to operative indications.The nature of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder is difficult to define before operation, and surgical indications still remain controversial. The aim of this study was to identify characteristics of each type of polypoid lesion of the gallbladder and indications for surgery.Clinical data were retrospectively correlated with the histopathologic characteristics of polypoid lesions in 100 patients who had cholecystectomy.There were 74 benign polypoid lesions, including 39 cholesterol polyps, 20 adenomas, and 15 with adenomyomatous hyperplasia and 26 malignant polypoid lesions. Twenty-seven percent of patients with benign polyps and 73 percent of patients with malignant polyps were over 60 years of age. Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder were diagnosed by preoperative ultrasonography in only 36 patients (36%). All types of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder, whether benign or malignant, were frequently solitary, and gallstones coexisted in the majority of patients with all polypoid lesions of the gallbladder except cholesterol polyps. The lesions were > 10 mm in 88% of the malignant polyps and in only 15% of the benign polyps.The risk factors for malignancy were the age of the patient ( >60 years), the coexistence of gallstones, and the size of the polypoid lesions (>10 mm in diameter). In asymptomatic patients, cholecystectomy can be justified if there are risk factors for malignancy.Pre-operative factors that can predict neoplastic polypoid lesions of the gallbladder.To investigate the preoperative factors that can predict neoplastic polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLGs) as well as malignant PLGs.A retrospective analysis was conducted on the 210 consecutively enrolled patients who underwent cholecystectomy due to a PLG larger than 10 mm, as was determined by preoperative trans-abdominal ultrasonography or endoscopic ultrasonography. We analyzed the medical, laboratory, radiologic data and the pathologic results.In 210 cases, 146 had non-neoplastic polyps (69.5%) and 64 cases were neoplastic polyps (30.5%). An older age (≥ 65 years), the presence of diabetes mellitus (DM) and the size of polyp (≥ 15 mm) were revealed to be independent predictive variables for neoplastic polyps with odd ratios (OR) of 2.27 (P = 0.044), 2.64 (P = 0.021) and 4.94 (P < 0.01), respectively. Among the neoplastic PLGs, an older age (≥ 65 years), the presence of DM and polyp size (≥ 15 mm) were associated with malignancy with ORs of 4.97 (P = 0.005), 6.13 (P = 0.001) and 20.55 (P < 0.001), respectively.Among patients with PLGs larger than 10 mm in size, higher risk groups such as elderly patients more than 65 years old, those with DM or a large polyp size (≥ 15 mm) should be managed by cholecystectomy.[Ultrasonic diagnosis of early gallbladder cancer].In a series of 514 consecutive cholecystectomy specimens excised for biliary disease, 1.4% exhibited early carcinoma and 4.5% advanced. On the other hand benign tumors and pseudotumors were observed in 2.0% of cholesterol polyps, 0.8% adenomas, 1.0% inflammatory polyps and 10.8% adenomyomatosis. On the basis of these finding in this series, diagnostic usefulness and difficulties of ultrasound were discussed. Sonography can provide critical diagnostic information for preoperative identification of small polypoid lesion and irregular wall thickness.[Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: indications for surgical treatment].Through the study of a population of 176 patients with polypoid lesions of the gallbladder, our aim was to demonstrate the advantages of ultrasonography in the identification of those cases in which surgical intervention is indicated. From among our patients, specific criteria were used to select 92 patients to submit to cholecystectomy. These criteria were based on a thorough evaluation of the clinical data (patient's age, familiarity, presence of symptoms), and on careful examination of the ultrasonographic images (number and size of lesions, presence of associated cholelithiasis, state of the gallbladder wall). The histological results and the literature data confirmed the validity of our protocol. The risk factors for carcinoma are age (> 60 years), coexistence of gallstone disease, and the size of the lesions (> 10 mm). Therefore, when these risk factors are present, cholecystectomy is justified even in asymptomatic patients.Polyps in the gallbladder. A prevalence study.The prevalence of gallbladder polyps as assessed by ultrasonography in a random population was 4.6% among men and 4.3% among women. The size of most polyps was 3 mm or more but never exceeded 10 mm. The prevalence of polyps was not significantly associated with age, sex, social factors, weight factors, physical activity, diabetes mellitus, pregnancies, use of exogenous female hormones, intake of alcohol, or plasma lipids. Polyps among men were significantly associated with a history of no smoking. This lack of risk factor profile resembled that of cholesterolosis, as seen in the literature, whereas it was quite different from that of gallstones. It is concluded that polyps in the gallbladder are common in a random population, and, although it is known from the literature that some cases may represent gallstones, the vast majority most probably represent the polypoid variation of cholesterolosis.Outcome of gall bladder polypoidal lesions detected by transabdominal ultrasound scanning: a nine year experience.To determine the outcome of polypoidal lesions within the gall bladder (PLG) diagnosed by trans-abdominal scanning.A nine-year (1993-2002) retrospective case-note review of all patients who underwent ultrasound scanning after referral to a single Upper GI Surgeon at a District General Hospital was conducted. Patients who were diagnosed with a PLG were included in our study. A database was constructed and patient details, investigations including ultrasound scan (USS) findings, treatment and histology and final diagnosis were recorded.Twenty-three (out of 651) patients were diagnosed pre-operatively by USS to have a polyp-like gall bladder lesion (PLG). Post cholecystectomy histological examination revealed 12 gallstones, 7 cholesterol polyps, 3 adenocarcinomas within polyps and 1 normal gall bladder. The specificity of USS in the diagnosis of PLG was 92.3%. All the true polyps were malignant. Overall USS had 66.66% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the pre-operative suspicion of malignancy. Using size greater than 10 mm as measured on USS as a cut-off, we find 100% sensitivity and 86.95% specificity with a positive predictive value of 50% in the diagnosis of malignancy in PLG.A large number of PLG are in fact calculi within diseased gall bladder. In cases of gall bladder polyps more then 10 mm in size on USS further imaging (cross-sectional and/or EUS) is indicated prior to surgery. This will help in the optimal management of patients and avoid histological surprises.Ultrasound of the gall bladder and biliary tree: part 1.A new strategy to predict the neoplastic polyps of the gallbladder based on a scoring system using EUS.A new method to predict neoplastic polyps of the gallbladder using a scoring system based on five endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) variables is presented.EUS data from patients with gallbladder polyps who were to undergo cholecystectomy were used for the construction of an EUS scoring system in polyps between 5 and 15 mm in diameter (reference group). The EUS scoring system developed from those patients was applied to other patients (validation group).In the reference group, size was the most significant predictor of neoplastic polyp. All polyps 5 mm or less in diameter were non-neoplastic and 94% of polyps of greater than 15 mm were neoplastic in the reference group. For polyps between 5 and 15 mm in diameter, the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curves (ROC) plots for the endoscopic scoring system was significantly greater than that under the ROC plots for polyp size alone (p < 0.01). In the validation group, the risk of neoplastic polyp was significantly higher for polyps with a score of 6 or greater compared with those with a score of less than 6 (p < 0.01).Our data show that a score based on five EUS variables identifies those patients at risk of neoplasia when polyps are between 5 and 15 mm in diameter. (Gastrointest Endosc 2000;52:372-9).Gray-scale ultrasonography as a screening procedure in the detection of gallbladder disease.The sonographic and surgical findings in 180 patients who underwent cholecystectomy for gallbladder disease were reviewed and correlated. Four abnormal groups were established. In Group I, the gallbladder was visible and contained structures which cast an acoustic shadow. In Group II, there was constant shadowing in the region of the gallbladder fossa, but the gallbladder itself was not visible. In Group III, there was a constant, immobile, echo-dense, nonshadowing area in the gallbladder wall. In Group IV, nonshadowing echoes were seen within the gallbladder lumen. The overall accuracy of ultrasound was 98.9%; the false-negative rate was 2.2%, the false-positive rate 2.8%. 5.6% of Group I patients had normal oral cholecystograms. Because of its high accuracy, minimal preparation, speed of diagnosis, and cost-effectiveness, the authors recommend that ultrasonic cholecystography be considered as a screening method, particularly for small polyps (< 4 mm).Differential diagnosis of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder by endoscopic ultrasonography.Transabdominal ultrasonography (US) has made the detection of gallbladder polyps easier, but the differential diagnosis of polyps less than 20 mm remains difficult. Therefore, we evaluated the usefulness of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) for the differential diagnosis of gallbladder polyps.Among patients with gallbladder polyps less than 20 mm, we reviewed 89 patients who underwent US and EUS before surgery and assessed the results of differential diagnoses by them.In all, 86.5% of these polyps were precisely diagnosed by EUS. However, only 51.7% were diagnosed by US. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of EUS at the diagnosis of carcinoma were 91.7%, 87.7%, 75.9%, and 96.6%, respectively. Those of US were 54.2%, 53.8%, 54.2%, and 94.6%, respectively.EUS may markedly improve the accuracy of the differential diagnosis of gallbladder polyps. Therefore, EUS is thought to play an important role in determining the treatment strategy for gallbladder polyps.[Management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder by endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS)--a retrospective study to establish the diagnostic criteria and a prospective study to evaluate its reliability].The diagnostic criteria of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) in the management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder was established by a retrospective study using 57 cases with polypoid lesions of the gallbladder that were all resected and confirmed histologically. By this study, EUS findings of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder were classified into the following six groups; Type I with a foamy high echogram, Type II with a globular high echogram, Type III with a papillary high echogram, Type IV with a papillary solid echogram, Type V with a nodular solid echogram and Type VI with a nodular solid echogram including multiple spotty an-echoic areas which suggested the presence of Rokitansky-Aschoff sinus. Comparing the types of EUS findings with histological diagnosis, Type I and II corresponded to cholesterol polyps. Type III and IV contained benign pseudo tumors such as cholesterol polyp or hyperplastic polyp as well as tumorous lesions such as adenocarcinoma or adenoma. Type III with over 10 mm in size and IV with over 5 mm in size had a possibility of tumorous lesions. Type V usually corresponded to adenocarcinoma, and Type VI to adenomyomatous hyperplasia. From these results, the following criteria was established; (1) Polypoid lesions showing Type I, II, III with less than 10 mm in size, IV with less than 5 mm in size and VI should be followed-up as benign diseases. (2) Polypoid lesions of Type III with over 10 mm in size and IV with over 5 mm in size was considered to be relative indications for surgery as tumors. (3) Polypoid lesions of Type V was an absolute surgical indication as malignant. The reliability of this EUS criteria was followingly evaluated by a prospective study using 94 cases with polypoid lesions of the gallbladder; 32 cases with open or laparoscopic cholecystectomy and 62 cases with over one year follow-up observations. The criteria corresponded well with the histological or follow-up findings in Type I, II, III with less than 10 mm in size, IV with less than 5 mm in size, V and VI. It had, however, a tendency of over indications to surgery in Type III with over 10 mm in size and IV with over 5 mm in size because these types were widely set not to overlook tumorous lesions such as adenoma and small adenocarcinoma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)High-resolution sonography for distinguishing neoplastic gallbladder polyps and staging gallbladder cancer.OBJECTIVE. The purposes of this study were to compare staging accuracy of high-resolution sonography (HRUS) with combined low- and high-MHz transducers with that of conventional sonography for gallbladder cancer and to investigate the differences in the imaging findings of neoplastic and nonneoplastic gallbladder polyps. MATERIALS AND METHODS. Our study included 37 surgically proven gallbladder cancer (T1a = 7, T1b = 2, T2 = 22, T3 = 6), including 15 malignant neoplastic polyps and 73 surgically proven polyps (neoplastic = 31, nonneoplastic = 42) that underwent HRUS and conventional transabdominal sonography. Two radiologists assessed T-category and predefined polyp findings on HRUS and conventional transabdominal sonography. Statistical analyses were performed using chi-square and McNemar tests. RESULTS. The diagnostic accuracy for the T category was T1a = 92-95%, T1b = 89-95%, T2 = 78-86%, and T3 = 84-89%, all with good agreement (κ = 0.642) using HRUS. The diagnostic accuracy for differentiating T1 from T2 or greater than T2 was 92% and 89% on HRUS and 65% and 70% with conventional transabdominal sonography. Statistically common findings for neoplastic polyps included size greater than 1 cm, single lobular surface, vascular core, hypoechoic polyp, and hypoechoic foci (p < 0.05). The value of HRUS in the differential diagnosis of a gallbladder polyp was more clearly depicted internal echo foci than conventional transabdominal sonography (39 vs 21). A polyp size greater than 1 cm was independently associated with a neoplastic polyp (odds ratio = 7.5, p = 0.02). The AUC of a polyp size greater than 1 cm was 0.877. The sensitivity and specificity were 66.67% and 89.13%, respectively. CONCLUSION. HRUS is a simple method that enables accurate T categorization of gallbladder carcinoma. It provides high-resolution images of gallbladder polyps and may have a role in stratifying the risk for malignancy. Role of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder.This retrospective clinicohistopathologic study was performed to delineate the role of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder. One hundred forty-three consecutive patients who had a preoperative sonographic diagnosis of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder with a diameter less than 1.5 cm and who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy at Cathay General Hospital were included in the analysis. Histopathologic study showed that 22 (15.4%) patients had true tumors, including adenoma (16), adenoma with focal adenocarcinoma (2), adenocarcinoma (3), and carcinoid tumor (1). Tumorlike lesions were found in 121 (84.6%) patients and included cholesterol polyp (106), adenomyomatous hyperplasia (10), inflammatory polyp (3), and papillary hyperplasia (2). The mean diameter of malignant polypoid lesions of the gallbladder was 1.35 +/- 0.42 cm, which was significantly larger than that of cholesterol polyps (0.66 +/- 0.40 cm, P = 0.0001) but not significantly larger than that of adenomyomatous hyperplasias (1.12 +/- 0.42 cm) and adenomas (1.08 +/- 0.47 cm). The mean age of patients with malignant polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (61.2 +/- 13.3 years old) was significantly older than that of patients with adenomyomatous hyperplasia (46.6 +/- 13.4 years, P = 0.03), cholesterol polyps (44.5 +/- 10.5 years, P = 0.0003), and adenomas (41.4 +/- 9.4 years, P = 0.0008). Clinical follow-up showed that most (98.6%) patients benefited from the minimal invasiveness of laparoscopic cholecystectomy with satisfactory surgical results. We conclude that laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a reliable, safe, and minimally invasive biopsy procedure and definite management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder with a diameter less than 1.5 cm.Laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the treatment of gallbladder polypoid lesions--15 years of experience.Due to the constant increase of public health awareness and widespread "cancerophobia", the progressively larger number of incidentally diagnosed gall-bladder polyps became the source of anxiety, which leads patients and physicians to undertake therapeutic decisions, despite the absence of symptoms. The majority of gall-bladder polyps are benign. It is estimated that only 3 to 5% of polyps are malignant. Currently, there is lack of randomized control trials based on which the clear-cut criteria of qualification of patients with gall-bladder polyps for surgical procedure can be created. The aim of the study was to analyze gall-bladder polyps in patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the 2nd Department of General Surgery, Jagiellonian University Collegium Medicum.The retrospective study was conducted on 5369 patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the 2nd Department of General Surgery, Jagiellonian University Collegium Medicum with special attention to 152 (2.8%) patients in whom gall-bladder polyps were diagnosed preoperatively. Qualification criteria for surgery, surgical treatment results, and histopathological examination results were also analyzed.Amongst the 5369 patients qualified for laparoscopic cholecystectomy, 152 (2.8%) were diagnosed with gall-bladder polyps during the preoperative ultrasound examinations. Postoperative histopathological examinations of 41 (27%) patients confirmed the presence of gall-bladder polyps. In 102 (67%) patients, only gall-stones were diagnosed without previously described polyps during the ultrasound examination. Analysis of the histopathological examination results revealed the presence of benign lesions in 35 (23.35%) patients. In 5 (3%) patients the presence of an adenoma, and in one (0.65%) the presence of adenocarcinoma were confirmed.Based on the conducted study and previous personal experience in the treatment of patients with gall-bladder polyps, we believe that due to the potential risk of neoplastic transformation, patients with polyps larger than 10 mm in diameter and polyps of proven rapid growth should be qualified for laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Indications for surgical treatment also seem reasonable in case of patients with present polyps and coexisting right upper quadrant pain, even though the above-mentioned is connected with gall-bladder deposits.[Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: diagnostic and therapeutic problems].The nature of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder is difficult to define. Surgical indication still remains controversial but in some cases mandatory. In this clinical study data were retrospectively evaluated in 25 patients with polypoid lesions who underwent laparoscopic surgery to elucidate the ultrasonic findings and to establish criteria for the best treatment.Ultrasonography in the diagnosis of true gallbladder polyps: the contradiction in the literature.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLGs) are often incidentally identified during ultrasonographic examination of abdominal pain. The present study was designed to determine the reliability of ultrasonography (US) in the diagnosis of PLGs. The records of 853 patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) for PLGs in Gazi Medical School from January 2000 to January 2004 were reviewed. Data were collected regarding the patients' gender, age, symptoms, serum lipid levels, the size and the number of polyps on US, surgical indications for PLGs and histopathological diagnosis. In all, 56 of 853 patients had PLGs and underwent LC. Right upper quadrant pain (59%) was the most common presenting symptom that led to gallbladder US. Nearly 75% of the lesions were smaller than 10 mm. At histopathologic examination cholesterolosis was found in 17 of 56 (30%) patients, and 12 of 56 (21%) demonstrated only cholelithiasis; 17 (30%) patients had both cholesterolosis and stones. Only 10 (18%) patients had adenomatous polyp and 8 of these polyps were larger than 1 cm. Overall US-based diagnosis of gallbladder polyp was inaccurate in 82%. The sensitivity and specificity of US for polyps <1 cm was 20% and 95.1%, respectively, whereas the sensitivity and specificity of US for polyps >1 cm was 80% and 99.3%, respectively. The accuracy of US in diagnosing PLGs was poor, especially in polyps <1 cm.[Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder wall].Modern sonography has led to an increased appraisal of the therapeutic consequences in cases of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder wall. In 30 patients it was attempted to differentiate between cholesterol polyps and polypoid lesions suspect for malignancy. Histologic results and data in the literature induce us to recommend cholecystectomy in solitary lesions of more than 5 mm, combined occurrence with gallstones and in patients beyond the 60th year of life.[Gallbladder polyps: correlation between ultrasonographic and histopathological findings].Gallbladder polyps are becoming a common finding. The management of these polyps is complicated considering that they can bear malignant lesions.To analyze the ultrasonographic and histopathologic findings of patients operated due to gallbladder polyps.The records of patients with ultrasonographic diagnosis of gallbladder polyp and that underwent cholecystectomy in a thirteen years period were reviewed, collecting their demographic, ultrasonographic and histopathological data.One hundred and twenty three patients were operated. The mean age was 44+/-13 years, and 69% were women. The mean size of polyps in ultrasonography was 7.3+/-5 mm. Histopathology confirmed the presence of polyps in 79% of patients, with a mean size and number of lesions of 5.1+/-3.8 mm and 2.1+/-2, respectively. Nine percent of polyps were greater than 10 mm, and single polyps were significantly larger than the multiple ones (p =0.003). Four cases of adenoma (3.2%) were diagnosed; one of them had in situ carcinoma. All were single and larger than 10 mm. We found a significant correlation between ultrasonographic and histopathological polyp size determination (r =0.47; p =0.002). Polyp size was also a predictor of the presence of adenoma (p =0.043; confidence intervals: 1.006-1.424).There is a good correlation between the size of the gallbladder polyp in ultrasonography and the size in the histopathology report. Gallbladder adenoma is uncommon and it correlates with the size of the polyp. In this series, size was the only predictor of the presence of adenoma.[Ultrasonography and computerized tomography in the diagnosis of gallbladder carcinoma].The US and CT images of 40 surgical patients with histologically proved gallbladder carcinoma were retrospectively reviewed. The radiologic diagnosis was correct in 22 patients (55%). Gallbladder carcinoma patterns were: an intraluminal mass (type I) (7 patients, 17.5%), focal or diffuse wall thickening (type II) (5 patients, 12.5%) a mass replacing the gallbladder (type III) (10 patients, 25%). In 5 patients with type I or II gallbladder carcinoma, US and CT diagnosis was made easier by the presence of associated findings--i.e., liver infiltration and/or metastases, lymphadenopathy, dilated intrahepatic ducts, ascites. In 7 patients a gallbladder carcinoma was suspected in the presence of a small intraluminal mass (6 cases) or of focal wall thickening (1 case), with no stones and with dilated intrahepatic biliary ducts. In the extant 18 patients (45%) the radiologic diagnosis was: polyps (6 cases), stones with cholecystitis (11 cases) and empyema (1 case). US is the examination of choice in the diagnosis of gallbladder and biliary ducts conditions, but several diagnostic problems may arise in the differentiation from polyps and acute inflammatory disease. CT better demonstrates gastrointestinal tract invasion and lymphadenopathy, which can be a valuable finding for treatment planning.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder: diagnosis and followup.Polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLG) are commonly seen on ultrasonography (US), but optimal management of this problem is ill-defined. The aims of this study were to assess the natural history and the histologic characteristics of US-detected PLG.Patients with PLG detected by abdominal US were identified retrospectively. Patients with infiltrative masses suspicious for gallbladder cancer were not included. Histologic findings were analyzed in patients who underwent cholecystectomy, and change in polyp size was determined in patients who underwent serial US imaging.From 1996 through 2007, 417 patients with PLG detected on US were identified. Two hundred twenty-nine patients (55%) were women, and median age was 59 years (range 20 to 94 years). Two hundred sixty-five patients (64%) were found to have PLG on US during the workup of other unrelated disease; 94 patients (23%) had abdominal symptoms. Ninety-four percent of patients had PLG< or =10 mm, and 7% had PLG>10 mm; 59% of patients had a single polyp and 12% had gallstones. Among 143 patients who had repeat US followup, growth was observed in only 8 patients (6%). Cholecystectomy (n=80) revealed that most patients had either pseudopolyps (58%) or no polyp (32%). Neoplastic polyps (adenoma) were found in 10% of patients. In situ cancer was seen in one patient with a 14-mm lesion.Small PLG (< or =10 mm in diameter) detected by US are infrequently associated with symptoms and can be safely observed. The risk of invasive cancer is very low, and was not seen in any patient in this study.Gallbladder polyps: factors affecting surgical decision.To determine the factors affecting the decision to perform surgery, and the efficiency of ultrasonography (USG) in detecting gallbladder polyps (GP).Data for 138 patients who underwent cholecystectomy between 1996 and 2012 in our clinic with a diagnosis of GP were retrospectively analyzed. Demographic data, clinical presentation, principal symptoms, ultrasonographic and histopathological findings were evaluated. Patients were evaluated in individual groups according to the age of the patients (older or younger than 50 years old) and polyp size (bigger or smaller than 10 mm) and characteristics of the polyps (pseudopolyp or real polyps). χ(2) tests were used for the statistical evaluation of the data.The median age was 50 (26-85) years and 91 of patients were female. Of 138 patients who underwent cholecystectomy with GP diagnosis, only 99 had a histopathologically defined polyp; 77 of them had pseudopolyps and 22 had true polyps. Twenty-one patients had adenocarcinoma. Of these 21 patients, 11 were male, their median age was 61 (40-85) years and all malignant polyps had diameters > 10 mm (P < 0.0001). Of 138 patients in whom surgery were performed, 112 had ultrasonographic polyps with diameters < 10 mm. Of the other 26 patients who also had polyps with diameters > 10 mm, 22 had true polyps. The sensitivity of USG was 84.6% for polyps with diameters > 10 mm (P < 0.0001); however it was only 66% in polyps with diameters < 10 mm.The risk of malignancy was high in the patients over 50 years old who had single polyps with diameters > 10 mm.Ultrasonography incorrectly diagnoses gallbladder polyps.To determine the accuracy of ultrasound-diagnosed polypoid lesions of the gallbladder in their institution, the authors reviewed the records of 41 patients with polypoid lesions of the gallbladder who underwent cholecystectomy, and collected data concerning age, sex, symptoms, and histopathologic diagnosis. Histopathologic evaluation confirmed polyps in only two patients (4.9%) categorized as having polypoid lesions of the gallbladder. Most specimens from patients with ultrasonography reports suggesting small polyps manifested cholesterolosis (17 of 41) or cholelithiasis (15 of 41). No specimen harbored malignancy. Mean patient age was 47.4 years, and the most common symptoms were pain (85%), nausea (44%), vomiting (29%), and abnormal liver function test results (14%). The accuracy of sonography for diagnosing polypoid lesions of the gallbladder was poor. Many of the small polyps seen on sonography most likely represented a stone embedded in the gallbladder wall or other abnormality. Because of the likelihood of cholelithiasis, the authors recommend that patients with biliary symptoms and ultrasonography findings suggesting polypoid lesions of the gallbladder undergo cholecystectomy.Isolated small gallbladder polyps: an indication for cholecystectomy in symptomatic patients.To evaluate patients with gallbladder polyps and to compare them with patients with chronic acalculous cholecystitis, 301 patients with chronic acalculous disease of the gallbladder, of which 45 had polyp disease of the gallbladder, were reviewed out of 7181 cholecystectomies performed from June 1985 through June 1995. Of the 45 patients, 30 (Group A) were diagnosed preoperatively by ultrasound and 15 (Group B) postoperatively on pathologic examination. In each group, the most common polyp was cholesterol type (19/45) with multiple lesions in 10 of these 19 patients. Chronic cholecystitis was present elsewhere in the gallbladder in 40 per cent of Group A and 80 per cent of Group B patients (P = 0.02). Forty-three patients had polyps less than 5 mm in diameter, one a 1.5-cm gallbladder cholesterol polyp, and one a 1.3-cm tubulovillous polyp with a focus of carcinoma in situ. During this same period, 17 patients had primary malignancy of the gallbladder, none of which were found in polypoid lesions. In Group A patients there were significantly fewer preoperative tests than in typical acalculous patients [2.3 versus 3.8 (P<0.03)], including upper endoscopy (P<0.02) and hepatobiliary scintigraphy (P<0.00001). Of the patients with polyps, 42 of 45 (93.3%) had resolution of symptoms postoperatively with a mean follow-up of 178.9+/-505.0 days (range 1-2438 days). Most patients with biliary tract symptoms and a small (<5-mm) gallbladder polyp underwent fewer preoperative diagnostic tests than patients with chronic acalculous cholecystitis. This abbreviated preoperative workup appears warranted in view of the high incidence of symptom resolution.A useful approach to the differential diagnosis of small polypoid lesions of the gallbladder, utilizing an endoscopic ultrasound scoring system.The purpose of this study was to assess the accuracy of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) in making a differential diagnosis of small (< or = 20 mm in diameter) polypoid lesions of the gallbladder, and to construct an EUS scoring system.The EUS findings were retrospectively analyzed in 70 surgical cases of small polypoid lesions classified into two groups: neoplastic (adenocarcinoma in 11, and adenoma in 7), and non-neoplastic (cholesterol polyp in 44, inflammatory polyp in 7 and fibrous polyp in 1). The EUS variables were the maximum diameter and height/width ratio of the largest polyps, echo level, internal echo pattern, surface patterns, number and shape of polyps, presence of hyperechoic spotting, complication of gallbladder stones. The EUS data were used for the construction of an EUS scoring system to ascertain the risk of neoplasia.Three EUS variables, i. e. tumor maximum size, internal echo pattern, and hyperechoic spotting were statistically significant according to multivariate analysis using stepwise logistic regression models (P < 0.01, P < 0.05, and P < 0.01, respectively). The total EUS score based on the coefficient of multivariate analysis was as follows: (maximum diameter in mm) + (internal echo pattern score; where heterogeneous = 4, homogeneous = 0) + (hyperechoic spot[s] score; where presence = - 5, absence = 0). According to our EUS scoring system, the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for the risk of neoplastic polyps with scores of 12 or higher were 77.8 %, 82.7 % and 82.9 %, respectively.The EUS scoring system will be a useful means of differentiating between neoplastic and non-neoplastic polyps of the gallbladder.Cholesterol polyps of the gallbladder: ultrasound demonstration.Gallbladder lesions identified on ultrasound. Lessons from the last 10 years.Possible mass lesions identified on ultrasound (US) of the gallbladder may prompt an aggressive surgical intervention due to the possibility of a malignant neoplasm.This study aims to utilize a large modern series of patients with gallbladder lesions identified on US to evaluate imaging characteristics consistent with malignancy.A retrospective review was conducted of gallbladder ultrasound reports and clinicopathologic data of patients with a mass identified on US.Approximately 59,271 abdominal ultrasounds and 9,117 cholecystectomies were performed between February 2000 and February 2010. We identified 213 patients with a questionable gallbladder neoplasm on ultrasonography who underwent surgical exploration. Median age was 52 years (range=11-87 years) and 147 (69%) were females. Final pathology demonstrated no neoplasm in 130 patients (61%), while 32 patients (15%) had a wall adenomyoma, 36 (17%) had a polyp (five of which were malignant), 14 (7%) had an adenocarcinoma not arising from a polyp, and one patient had a cystic papillary neoplasm. The smaller the lesion, the more likely it was to be a pseudo-mass. For lesions measuring <5 mm on US, 83% had no lesion found on final pathology. Significant predictors of malignancy were age >52 years (p<0.001), presence of gallstones on US (p=0.004), size >9 mm (p<0.001), evidence of invasion at the liver interface (p<0.001), and wall thickening >5 mm (p<0.001). Shape (sessile or penduculated), echogenicity (echogenic or isoechoic), or presence of flow on Doppler were not predictors of malignancy. An US size of ≤ 9 mm had a negative predictive value of 100% for malignancy.Despite improvements in imaging, most apparent lesions measuring <5 mm on US are not identified in the surgical specimen. US size >9 mm, age >52 years, US suggestion of invasion at the liver interface, and wall thickening >5 mm, especially in the presence of gallstones, should raise the suspicion of malignancy.Role of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in treating gallbladder polyps.Since the application of laparoscopic cholecystectomy (Lap C) to gallbladder polyps has not yet been fully evaluated, we performed Lap C on 26 patients with gallbladder polyps. Pathological examinations showed adenocarcinoma in three patients, adenoma in two, and cholesterol polyp in 21. Preoperative diagnoses of the cases with adenocarcinoma were a cholesterol polyp in one patient and an adenoma in two. Adenocarcinoma was confirmed to reside in the mucosa without any invasion of lymphatic ducts or small vessels in the three patients. This procedure was considered to be sufficient for this grade of cancer, and, therefore, no additional operations were performed. At present, our policy is to resect by Lap C a gallbladder polyp having a maximum size larger than 10 mm and a tendency to grow or presenting with suspicion of adenoma. When cancer is suspected by preoperative examinations, however, traditional surgery may be recommended.Sonography of polypoid cholesterolosis.Endoscopic ultrasonography for differential diagnosis of polypoid gall bladder lesions: analysis in surgical and follow up series.Differential diagnosis is often difficult for small (</=20 mm) polypoid lesions of the gall bladder.To assess the diagnostic accuracy of endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) for polypoid lesions in a surgical and follow up series.A total of 194 patients with small polypoid lesions underwent both ultrasonography and EUS. A tiny echogenic spot or an aggregation of echogenic spots and multiple microcysts or a comet tail artefact indicated cholesterol polyp and adenomyomatosis respectively. Other lesions were diagnosed as neoplastic (adenoma or adenocarcinoma). In the 58 patients who underwent surgery, the histological diagnoses were cholesterol polyp (n = 36), adenomyomatosis (n = 7), adenoma (n = 4), and adenocarcinoma (n = 11). Of the remaining 136 patients with an EUS diagnosis of non-neoplastic lesions, 125 were followed up with ultrasonography alone or with EUS for 1-8.7 years (mean 2.6 years).In the surgical series, EUS (97%) differentiated polypoid lesions more precisely than ultrasonography (76%). During follow up, the lesions remained unchanged in size in 109 (87%) of the 125 patients with non-neoplastic lesions diagnosed by EUS. No neoplastic lesions developed in these patients. Ultrasonography had shown lesions to be neoplastic in 13% of the follow up series.EUS is highly accurate for differentially diagnosing polypoid gall bladder lesions. It is recommended when ultrasonography cannot rule out neoplastic lesions. Non-neoplastic lesions diagnosed by EUS may be followed and observed with ultrasonography.Surgical management of polypoid lesions of the gallbladder.With improvements in ultrasonography more polypoid lesions of the gallbladder (PLGs) are being detected. The management of these is controversial.The demographic, radiological and pathological data of 38 patients with ultrasonographically detected PLGs were reviewed. A Medline search for such lesions was performed and a review of the literature is presented.Thirty-four patients underwent cholecystectomy and four were advised against or declined operation. Of the 34 who had cholecystectomy, 11 had macroscopic and histopathologically proven PLGs. Of these, seven had cholesterol polyps, two had adenomas, one had a carcinoid tumour and one had an adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder. One patient had a histopathologically normal gallbladder. The remainder had chronic cholecystitis with or without gallstones. All of the patients with neoplastic lesions of the gallbladder had solitary polyps greater than 1.0 cm in diameter.A protocol for the management of ultrasonographically detected PLGs is proposed. In this protocol it is suggested that patients with a PLG should undergo surgery if they are symptomatic, or if the PLG is 1.0 cm or more in diameter.