The 18F-FDG PET cingulate island sign and comparison to 123I-beta-CIT SPECT for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.Neuroimaging is increasingly used to supplement the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) by showing reduced occipital metabolism and perfusion and reduced striatal dopaminergic innervation. We aimed to optimize the interpretation of (18)F-FDG PET images for differentiating DLB from Alzheimer disease (AD) and to compare the results with dopamine transporter imaging using (123)I-beta-carbomethoxy-3ss-(4-iodophenyl)tropane ((123)I-beta-CIT) SPECT.Fourteen subjects with a clinical diagnosis of DLB and 10 with AD underwent both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT. Four DLB and 1 AD diagnoses were subsequently confirmed at autopsy. Diagnostic accuracy was calculated for visual interpretation by 3 readers of standard 3-plane and stereotactic surface projection (18)F-FDG PET images, receiver-operating-characteristic analysis of regional (18)F-FDG uptake, and a cutoff value for the striatal-to-occipital binding ratio of beta-CIT defined by receiver-operating-characteristic analysis.Visual interpretation of 3-plane (18)F-FDG PET images had a sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 93% for DLB, slightly higher than the results with the stereotactic surface projection images. Regionally, hypometabolism in the lateral occipital cortex had the highest sensitivity (88%), but relative preservation of the mid or posterior cingulate gyrus (cingulate island sign) had the highest specificity (100%). Region-of-interest analysis revealed that occipital hypometabolism and relative preservation of the posterior cingulate both had a sensitivity of 77% and specificity of 80%. beta-CIT achieved 100% accuracy and greater effect size than did (18)F-FDG PET (Cohen d = 4.1 vs. 1.9).Both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT appear useful for the diagnosis of DLB, although the latter provides more robust results. The cingulate island sign may enhance the specificity of (18)F-FDG PET.The 18F-FDG PET cingulate island sign and comparison to 123I-beta-CIT SPECT for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.Neuroimaging is increasingly used to supplement the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) by showing reduced occipital metabolism and perfusion and reduced striatal dopaminergic innervation. We aimed to optimize the interpretation of (18)F-FDG PET images for differentiating DLB from Alzheimer disease (AD) and to compare the results with dopamine transporter imaging using (123)I-beta-carbomethoxy-3ss-(4-iodophenyl)tropane ((123)I-beta-CIT) SPECT.Fourteen subjects with a clinical diagnosis of DLB and 10 with AD underwent both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT. Four DLB and 1 AD diagnoses were subsequently confirmed at autopsy. Diagnostic accuracy was calculated for visual interpretation by 3 readers of standard 3-plane and stereotactic surface projection (18)F-FDG PET images, receiver-operating-characteristic analysis of regional (18)F-FDG uptake, and a cutoff value for the striatal-to-occipital binding ratio of beta-CIT defined by receiver-operating-characteristic analysis.Visual interpretation of 3-plane (18)F-FDG PET images had a sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 93% for DLB, slightly higher than the results with the stereotactic surface projection images. Regionally, hypometabolism in the lateral occipital cortex had the highest sensitivity (88%), but relative preservation of the mid or posterior cingulate gyrus (cingulate island sign) had the highest specificity (100%). Region-of-interest analysis revealed that occipital hypometabolism and relative preservation of the posterior cingulate both had a sensitivity of 77% and specificity of 80%. beta-CIT achieved 100% accuracy and greater effect size than did (18)F-FDG PET (Cohen d = 4.1 vs. 1.9).Both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT appear useful for the diagnosis of DLB, although the latter provides more robust results. The cingulate island sign may enhance the specificity of (18)F-FDG PET.Dopamine transporter single photon emission computerized tomography in the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is part of the spectrum of Lewy body disorders. However, it may be difficult to diagnose patients who have dementia but no Parkinsonism. Visual and semiquantitative assessment of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic nerve terminals in the putamen and caudate nuclei can be obtained with single photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) using ligands that bind to the dopamine transporter molecule in the membranes of the nigrostriatal nerve terminals. This can be employed as a means of identifying subclinical degeneration of nigrostriatal neurones in patients with suspected DLB, increasing the probability of the diagnosis. In several studies, the sensitivity and specificity of abnormal dopamine transporter scans with regard to diagnosing probable DLB are better than 75 and 90%, respectively. This communication outlines the evidence for this and discusses some of the advantages, potential disadvantages, and areas of uncertainty with regard to the use of dopamine transporter SPECT in DLB diagnosis.Dementia with Lewy bodies: a comparison of clinical diagnosis, FP-CIT single photon emission computed tomography imaging and autopsy.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a common form of dementia. The presence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology modifies the clinical features of DLB, making it harder to distinguish DLB from AD clinically during life. Clinical diagnostic criteria for DLB applied at presentation can fail to identify up to 50% of cases. Our aim was to determine, in a series of patients with dementia in whom autopsy confirmation of diagnosis was available, whether functional imaging of the nigrostriatal pathway improves the accuracy of diagnosis compared with diagnosis by means of clinical criteria alone.A single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scan was carried out with a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand [123I]-2beta-carbometoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (FP-CIT; ioflupane) on a group of patients with a clinical diagnosis of DLB or other dementia. An abnormal scan was defined as one in which right and left posterior putamen binding, measured semiquantitatively, was more than 2 SDs below the mean of the controls.Over a 10 year period it was possible to collect 20 patients who had been followed from the time of first assessment and time of scan through to death and subsequent detailed neuropathological autopsy. Eight patients fulfilled neuropathological diagnostic criteria for DLB. Nine patients had AD, mostly with coexisting cerebrovascular disease. Three patients had other diagnoses. The sensitivity of an initial clinical diagnosis of DLB was 75% and specificity was 42%. The sensitivity of the FP-CIT scan for the diagnosis of DLB was 88% and specificity was 100%.FP-CIT SPECT scans substantially enhanced the accuracy of diagnosis of DLB by comparison with clinical criteria alone.Differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease using a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is one of the main differential diagnoses of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Key pathological features of patients with DLB are not only the presence of cerebral cortical neuronal loss, with Lewy bodies in surviving neurones, but also loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurones, similar to that of Parkinson's disease (PD). In DLB there is 40-70% loss of striatal dopamine.To determine if detection of this dopaminergic degeneration can help to distinguish DLB from AD during life.The integrity of the nigrostriatal metabolism in 27 patients with DLB, 17 with AD, 19 drug naive patients with PD, and 16 controls was assessed using a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand, (123)I-labelled 2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl)nortropane (FP-CIT), and single photon emission tomography (SPET). A SPET scan was carried out with a single slice, brain dedicated tomograph (SME 810) 3.5 hours after intravenous injection of 185 MBq FP-CIT. With occipital cortex used as a radioactivity uptake reference, ratios for the caudate nucleus and the anterior and posterior putamen of both hemispheres were calculated. All scans were also rated by a simple visual method.Both DLB and PD patients had significantly lower uptake of radioactivity than patients with AD (p<0.001) and controls (p<0.001) in the caudate nucleus and the anterior and posterior putamen.FP-CIT SPET provides a means of distinguishing DLB from AD during life.The 18F-FDG PET cingulate island sign and comparison to 123I-beta-CIT SPECT for diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.Neuroimaging is increasingly used to supplement the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) by showing reduced occipital metabolism and perfusion and reduced striatal dopaminergic innervation. We aimed to optimize the interpretation of (18)F-FDG PET images for differentiating DLB from Alzheimer disease (AD) and to compare the results with dopamine transporter imaging using (123)I-beta-carbomethoxy-3ss-(4-iodophenyl)tropane ((123)I-beta-CIT) SPECT.Fourteen subjects with a clinical diagnosis of DLB and 10 with AD underwent both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT. Four DLB and 1 AD diagnoses were subsequently confirmed at autopsy. Diagnostic accuracy was calculated for visual interpretation by 3 readers of standard 3-plane and stereotactic surface projection (18)F-FDG PET images, receiver-operating-characteristic analysis of regional (18)F-FDG uptake, and a cutoff value for the striatal-to-occipital binding ratio of beta-CIT defined by receiver-operating-characteristic analysis.Visual interpretation of 3-plane (18)F-FDG PET images had a sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 93% for DLB, slightly higher than the results with the stereotactic surface projection images. Regionally, hypometabolism in the lateral occipital cortex had the highest sensitivity (88%), but relative preservation of the mid or posterior cingulate gyrus (cingulate island sign) had the highest specificity (100%). Region-of-interest analysis revealed that occipital hypometabolism and relative preservation of the posterior cingulate both had a sensitivity of 77% and specificity of 80%. beta-CIT achieved 100% accuracy and greater effect size than did (18)F-FDG PET (Cohen d = 4.1 vs. 1.9).Both (18)F-FDG PET and (123)I-beta-CIT SPECT appear useful for the diagnosis of DLB, although the latter provides more robust results. The cingulate island sign may enhance the specificity of (18)F-FDG PET.Dopamine transporter single photon emission computerized tomography in the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is part of the spectrum of Lewy body disorders. However, it may be difficult to diagnose patients who have dementia but no Parkinsonism. Visual and semiquantitative assessment of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic nerve terminals in the putamen and caudate nuclei can be obtained with single photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) using ligands that bind to the dopamine transporter molecule in the membranes of the nigrostriatal nerve terminals. This can be employed as a means of identifying subclinical degeneration of nigrostriatal neurones in patients with suspected DLB, increasing the probability of the diagnosis. In several studies, the sensitivity and specificity of abnormal dopamine transporter scans with regard to diagnosing probable DLB are better than 75 and 90%, respectively. This communication outlines the evidence for this and discusses some of the advantages, potential disadvantages, and areas of uncertainty with regard to the use of dopamine transporter SPECT in DLB diagnosis.Dementia with Lewy bodies: a comparison of clinical diagnosis, FP-CIT single photon emission computed tomography imaging and autopsy.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a common form of dementia. The presence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology modifies the clinical features of DLB, making it harder to distinguish DLB from AD clinically during life. Clinical diagnostic criteria for DLB applied at presentation can fail to identify up to 50% of cases. Our aim was to determine, in a series of patients with dementia in whom autopsy confirmation of diagnosis was available, whether functional imaging of the nigrostriatal pathway improves the accuracy of diagnosis compared with diagnosis by means of clinical criteria alone.A single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scan was carried out with a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand [123I]-2beta-carbometoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (FP-CIT; ioflupane) on a group of patients with a clinical diagnosis of DLB or other dementia. An abnormal scan was defined as one in which right and left posterior putamen binding, measured semiquantitatively, was more than 2 SDs below the mean of the controls.Over a 10 year period it was possible to collect 20 patients who had been followed from the time of first assessment and time of scan through to death and subsequent detailed neuropathological autopsy. Eight patients fulfilled neuropathological diagnostic criteria for DLB. Nine patients had AD, mostly with coexisting cerebrovascular disease. Three patients had other diagnoses. The sensitivity of an initial clinical diagnosis of DLB was 75% and specificity was 42%. The sensitivity of the FP-CIT scan for the diagnosis of DLB was 88% and specificity was 100%.FP-CIT SPECT scans substantially enhanced the accuracy of diagnosis of DLB by comparison with clinical criteria alone.Differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease using a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand.Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is one of the main differential diagnoses of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Key pathological features of patients with DLB are not only the presence of cerebral cortical neuronal loss, with Lewy bodies in surviving neurones, but also loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurones, similar to that of Parkinson's disease (PD). In DLB there is 40-70% loss of striatal dopamine.To determine if detection of this dopaminergic degeneration can help to distinguish DLB from AD during life.The integrity of the nigrostriatal metabolism in 27 patients with DLB, 17 with AD, 19 drug naive patients with PD, and 16 controls was assessed using a dopaminergic presynaptic ligand, (123)I-labelled 2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl)nortropane (FP-CIT), and single photon emission tomography (SPET). A SPET scan was carried out with a single slice, brain dedicated tomograph (SME 810) 3.5 hours after intravenous injection of 185 MBq FP-CIT. With occipital cortex used as a radioactivity uptake reference, ratios for the caudate nucleus and the anterior and posterior putamen of both hemispheres were calculated. All scans were also rated by a simple visual method.Both DLB and PD patients had significantly lower uptake of radioactivity than patients with AD (p<0.001) and controls (p<0.001) in the caudate nucleus and the anterior and posterior putamen.FP-CIT SPET provides a means of distinguishing DLB from AD during life.