New light for old eyes: comparing melanopsin-mediated non-visual benefits of blue-light and UV-blocking intraocular lenses.Melanopsin-expressing photosensitive retinal ganglion cells form a blue-light-sensitive non-visual system mediating diverse physiological effects including circadian entrainment and cognitive alertness. Reduced blue wavelength retinal illumination through cataract formation is thought to blunt these responses while cataract surgery and intraocular lens (IOL) implantation have been shown to have beneficial effects on sleep and cognition. We aimed to use the reaction time (RT) task and the Epworth Sleepiness Score (ESS) as a validated objective platform to compare non-visual benefits of UV- and blue-blocking IOLs.Patients were prospectively randomised to receive either a UV- or blue-blocking IOL, performing an RT test and ESS questionnaire before and after surgery. Optical blurring at the second test controlled for visual improvement. Non-operative age-matched controls were recruited for comparison.80 participants completed the study. Those undergoing first-eye phacoemulsification demonstrated significant improvements in RT over control (p=0.001) and second-eye surgery patients (p=0.03). Moreover, reduced daytime sleepiness was measured by ESS for the first-eye surgery group (p=0.008) but not for the second-eye group (p=0.09). Choice of UV- or blue-blocking IOL made no significant difference to magnitude of cognitive improvement (p=0.272).Phacoemulsification, particularly first-eye surgery, has a strong positive effect on cognition and daytime alertness, regardless of IOL type.Effect of the AcrySof Natural intraocular lens on blue-yellow perimetry.To assess the differences in blue-yellow perimetry values in patients with an AcrySof Natural intraocular lens (IOL) in 1 eye and a conventional AcrySof IOL in the fellow eye.Cataract and glaucoma clinics of a medical school associated with a public hospital in Brazil.Forty-six patients had bilateral phacoemulsification and implantation of an AcrySof SN60AT IOL (Alcon) in 1 eye and an MA30AC IOL (Alcon) in the fellow eye. Blue-yellow perimetry was performed in both eyes, and the data were analyzed in blinded fashion using the Mann-Whitney U test.No statistically significant differences were observed in short-wavelength automated perimetry (SWAP) values between the 2 IOLs.There was no interference by the yellow filter of the AcrySof Natural IOL in blue-yellow perception as determined by SWAP.Influence of blue-light-filtering intraocular lenses on color perception and contrast acuity.To compare contrast acuity at different illumination levels and color vision and the subjective impression in patients after bilateral cataract surgery with a mixed implantation of a blue-light-filtering and an ultraviolet (UV)-filtering intraocular lens (IOL).Randomized, controlled, double-masked, and bilateral study with intraindividual comparison.This study included 48 eyes of 24 consecutive patients with age-related cataract.Each patient had standardized small incision cataract surgery with IOL implantation into the capsular bag. Patients were randomly assigned to receive a blue-light-filtering Hoya AF-1 (UY) YA-60BB IOL in one eye and a UV-filtering Hoya AF-1 (UV) VA-60BB IOL (Hoya Medical Europe, Frankfurt/Main, Germany) in the contralateral eye. Contrast acuity was measured at illumination levels of 500, 5, and 0.5 lux and contrast levels of 100%, 50%, 25%, 12.5%, and 6.25%. Color vision was assessed using the Lanthony desaturated D-15 test, the Lanthony new color test (Munsell chroma 2 and 4), and an anomaloscope. Blue/yellow foveal threshold was tested applying short-wave automated perimetry. The subjective visual impression of patients was evaluated using a questionnaire.Contrast acuity, color vision, and foveal threshold.The blue-light-filtering IOLs had worse contrast acuity (P = 0.0004) and foveal threshold (P = 0.008) compared with the UV-filtering IOLs. Color vision tests and high-contrast visual acuity did not show any statistically significant differences between IOLs (P>0.05). On questioning, 3 of 24 patients noticed a difference between the implanted IOLs concerning visual impression.This study shows that blue-light-filtering IOLs negatively affect contrast acuity and blue/yellow foveal threshold when compared with UV-filtering IOLs. Although the differences were small, the results suggest bilateral implantation of the same IOL type and avoidance of a mixed implantation of a blue-light-filtering IOL in one and a non-blue-light-filtering IOL in the contralateral eye in patients with high demands in color vision.The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest in any materials discussed in this article.Frequency doubling technology perimetry after clear and yellow intraocular lens implantation.To evaluate the effect of intraocular lens (IOL) color on frequency doubling technology (FDT).Randomized clinical trial.For 26 eyes of 26 patients, FDT perimetry (24-2-threshold test) was measured three months after cataract surgery. An acrylic IOL was randomly selected from clear (VA60BB, HOYA) and yellow-tinted lenses (YA60BB, HOYA), which only differed by color. As a control, a further 14 cataractous eyes with visual acuity > or =20/30 were examined. We analyzed mean deviation (MD) and pattern standard deviation (PSD) among the three groups.After cataract surgery, MD significantly improved (Fisher protected least significant difference (PLSD): P < .05), but PSD did not change (analysis of variance (ANOVA): P = .94) compared with control values. There was no significant difference between the two IOLs for either MD (Mann-Whitney test; P = .15) or PSD (Mann-Whitney test; P = .84).When interpreting the results of FDT, the effect of cataract should be considered but that of IOL color does not need consideration.Comparing the contrast sensitivity of a modified prolate anterior surface IOL and of two spherical IOLs.To compare the contrast sensitivity of an intraocular lens (IOL) with a modified prolate anterior surface (Tecnis Z9000, Pfizer), with 2 standard spherical IOLs (Sensar AR40e Opti-Edge IOL, AMO and AcrySof Natural SN60AT IOL, Alcon).In this prospective study, 98 eyes of 71 patients received 1 of 3 IOLs at random. After 6 months, best corrected visual acuity, pupil size and contrast sensitivity under mesopic and photopic conditions were measured.No statistically significant differences in preoperative and postoperative refractive error and best corrected visual acuity existed between the groups. When comparing the Tecnis IOL with the AR40e IOL, contrast sensitivity testing showed significantly better results in the Tecnis group at 3 and 12 cpd in photopic conditions; at 3, 12 and 18 cpd in photopic with glare; at 3, 12 and 18 cpd in mesopic and at 12 and 18 cpd in mesopic with glare. The Tecnis IOL provided significantly better contrast sensitivity at almost all spatial frequencies in any lighting condition in comparison with the SN60AT IOL.Implantation of a modified prolate IOL may improve quality of vision as demonstrated by our clinical results of contrast sensitivity testing. In this study, we found a better performance of the Tecnis IOL under both photopic and mesopic conditions, compared to the results of the AR40e and the SN60AT IOL.[Visual function with blue light filter IOLs].Recently, intraocular lenses (IOLs) with a blue light filter have been introduced to protect the retina from age-related macular degeneration (AMD) after cataract extraction. A reduction of longitudinal chromatic aberration by filtering blue light may enhance patient's visual function. In this study we compared subjective and objective parameters of visual function following implantation of blue light filter (yellow) IOLs and IOLs of the same design without filter.21 patients (21 eyes) underwent implantation of an IOL with a blue light filter (AF-1 UY, Hoya, Japan), 22 patients (22 eyes) received an IOL without blue light filter (AF-1 UV, Hoya, Japan). Patients were examined three months postoperatively for uncorrected and best corrected spectacle visual acuity, mesopic and photopic contrast sensitivity, colour vision and subjective quality of vision by a standard questionnaire.Eyes with blue light filter IOLs did not show any significant difference in any parameter analysed when compared to eyes without the blue light filter IOL. Subjective quality of vision was considered to be high by all patients and no significant difference was observed between the two IOL groups.The visual function of patients with blue filter IOLs is not significantly different to those without blue light filter IOLs. Since blue light filter IOLs did not show any functional disadvantage, but potentially protect the macula from AMD, blue light filter IOLs may be considered as a reasonable alternative to traditional IOLs, especially in eyes with a high risk for the development of macular degeneration.Clinical results of the blue-light filtering AcrySof Natural foldable acrylic intraocular lens.To verify the safety and effectiveness of the new AcrySof Natural (Alcon Laboratories, Inc.) blue-light filtering intraocular lens (IOL), which was designed to achieve a light-transmission spectrum similar to that of the natural human crystalline lens.Multicenter U.S. clinical trial.In a prospective randomized patient-masked multicenter study, 150 patients received the AcrySof Natural IOL and 147 patients received the AcrySof single-piece IOL as a control. Patients with bilateral age-related cataracts who were willing and able to wait at least 30 days between cataract procedures and had verified normal preoperative color vision were eligible for the study. Standardized surgery included a 4.0 to 5.0 mm capsulorhexis and phacoemulsification. All lenses were inserted in the capsular bag, with verification of in-the-bag placement of both haptics. In all bilateral implantation cases, the same model IOL was used in each eye. Postoperatively, contrast sensitivity and color perception were measured up to 180 days and up to 1 year (for visual acuity) after implantation.No statistically significant differences were discovered between the 2 patient groups in visual acuity, contrast sensitivity evaluated under mesopic and photopic conditions, or the number of patients who passed the Farnsworth D-15 color perception test. There were no lens-related adverse events in either group.The blue-light filtering AcrySof Natural IOL was equivalent to the conventional AcrySof lens in terms of postoperative visual performance. Additional long-term clinical studies should show whether the IOL actually provides the theoretical benefits to retinal health.Blue light filtering intraocular lenses in phacoemulsification cataract surgery.Blue light can damage retina and cause age related macular degeneration. After cataract surgery and lens removal retina stays unprotected. Blue light filtering intraocular lenses (IOL) increase protection of the retina. In our prospective study we investigated clinical results after bilateral implantation of Acrysof Natural IOL to 30 patients (N = 60 eyes). In a control group (N = 60 eyes, 30 patients), standard acrysof IOL was implanted bilaterally. Uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA), best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) and Nd YAG laser capsulotomy rate were measured and compared with control group. Subjective patient's satisfaction and subjective colour perception were also investigated. There was no significant difference in UCVA, BCVA and Nd YAG laser capsulotomy rate between the two groups. High patient's satisfaction was noticed (96.7% of patients would implant Acrysof Natural IOL again). Acrysof Natural IOL enables good visual acuity VA, low rate of Nd YAG laser capsulotomy and high patient's satisfaction without colour perception disturbances.Effect of an ultraviolet-filtering intraocular lens on cystoid macular edema.A prospective double-masked study of 301 patients was undertaken to compare the effect of ultraviolet (UV) filtering in implant intraocular lenses (IOL) on the angiographic incidence of cystoid macular edema (CME) in patients undergoing extracapsular cataract extraction. Patients were randomized to receive either a posterior chamber IOL that contained UV-absorbing chromophore or an identical IOL which did not contain such a chromophore. All patients were scheduled for fluorescein angiography between three and six months after surgery; 228 angiograms were obtained that were readable for the presence or absence of angiographic CME. The mean interval following surgery was 4.3 months. The incidence of CME was 18.8% (21 of 112) in patients who received lenses without UV-filtering chromophore and 9.5% (11 of 116) in patients who received IOLs that contained UV-filtering chromophore. These findings show that UV-filtering-IOLs resulted in a statistically significant (P = 0.03) decrease in the incidence of CME. The presence or absence of the UV-filtering chromophore did not, however, significantly affect visual acuity in the early postoperative period.Impact of blue-light filtering intraocular lens implantation on the quality of sleep in patients after cataract surgery.There are 2 main types of intraocular lens (IOL) currently implanted in patients after cataract surgery. Till now, we do not know exactly what the effect of intraocular lens implantation will be on the quality of sleep after cataract surgery.The binocular BF-IOL (BF-IOL Groups) and UVB-IOL (UVB-IOL Groups) implantations were performed in 60 and 59 cataract patients, respectively. Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) questionnaires were administered to evaluate the quality of sleep in patients preoperatively, 1 month (1 m) and 12 months (12 m) postoperatively. Independent sample test and χ test were used to evaluate the difference between the 2 groups; one-way ANOVA was used to evaluate the difference preoperatively and postoperatively in each group. The rank sum test was used for statistical analysis of 7 independent sleep components in PSQI.As compared to preoperatively, the PSQI overall scores in both groups improved significantly postoperatively (P = 0.00 at 1 m and 12 m). Among the 7 components of PSQI, 2 of them (sleep latency and daytime dysfunction) improved greatly postoperatively in both groups (P< 0.05). Although the improvement of PSQI overall score in the UVB-IOL group was greater than that in the BF-IOL Group only at early time (1 m) postoperatively (P = 0.00), but not late time (12 m, P > 0.05) after the cataract surgery.The sleep quality of cataract patients improved after IOL implantation, regardless of the type of IOL, suggesting that BF-IOL might serve as an alternative to conventional UVB-IOL without a detrimental effect on quality of sleep after cataract surgery.Objective assessment of inflammation after cataract surgery: comparison of 3 similar intraocular lens models.To compare postoperative inflammation in patients receiving 1 of 3 AcrySof intraocular lenses (IOLs): MA60AC (Group 1), SA60AT (Group 2), or SN60AT (Group 3).Service d'Ophtalmologie, Université Paris Descartes Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.This prospective randomized 3-month study included eyes that received 1 of the 3 IOL models with standard surgery and postoperative care. Anterior chamber cells were assessed at the slitlamp and anterior chamber flare values, with a Kowa 500 flare meter.Fifty-nine patients (59 eyes) with a mean age of 72.7 years were evaluated. Group 1 and Group 2 comprised 20 eyes each and Group 3, 19 eyes. No eye had anterior chamber cells at baseline. In all 3 groups, the presence of anterior chamber cells was highest 1 week postoperatively and generally decreased at subsequent visits, with no statistically significant differences between IOL groups at 1 week (P = .2655), 1 month (P = .073), or 3 months (P = .5766). A similar proportion of eyes in each IOL group had residual cells in the anterior chamber at 3 months; the cells were not clinically significant. In all groups, the mean flare values were low (<11 photons/ms) at baseline (P = .4522) and statistically similar between groups at each subsequent visit (P>or=.2801). There were no adverse events.The 3 IOLs models, including the blue light-filtering model, had similar anterior chamber cells and flare values over a 3-month period, showing the lack of difference in inflammation induced by cataract surgery with implantation of the 3 similar IOL models.Effect of aspherical and yellow tinted intraocular lens on blue-on-yellow perimetry.To investigate the possible effect of aspherical or yellow tinted intraocular lens (IOL) on contrast sensitivity and blue-on-yellow perimetry.This prospective randomized bilateral double-masked clinical study included 52 patients with visually significant bilateral cataracts divided in two groups; 25 patients (50 eyes) received aspherical intraocular lens in one eye and spherical intraocular lens in the fellow eye; and 27 patients (54 eyes) received ultraviolet and blue light filter (yellow tinted) IOL implantation in one eye and acrylic ultraviolet filter IOL in the fellow eye. The primary outcome measures were contrast sensitivity and blue-on-yellow perimetry values (mean deviation [MD] and pattern standard deviation [PSD]) investigated two years after surgery. The results were compared intra-individually.There was a statistically significant between-group (aspherical and spherical intraocular lens) difference in contrast sensitivity under photopic conditions at 12 cycles per degree and under mesopic conditions at all spatial frequencies. There were no between-group significant differences (yellow tinted and clear intraocular lens) under photopic or mesopic conditions. There was no statistically significant difference between all intraocular lens in MD or PSD.Contrast sensitivity was better under mesopic conditions with aspherical intraocular lens. Blue-on-yellow perimetry did not appear to be affected by aspherical or yellow tinted intraocular lens. Further studies with a larger sample should be carried out to confirm or not that hypotheses.Color perception with AcrySof natural and AcrySof single-piece intraocular lenses under photopic and mesopic conditions.To examine color perception in patients receiving bilateral implantation of an ultraviolet (UV) and blue-light filtering intraocular lens (IOL) (AcrySof Natural SN60AT, Alcon Laboratories Inc.) or a UV-only filtering IOL (AcrySof SA60AT) and to compare the results with those in a phakic group.Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.In this prospective study, age-matched subjects who passed the Ishihara test and had visual acuities of 20/25 or better were recruited. There were 2 pseudophakic groups (bilateral SN60AT or SA60AT IOLs) and 1 phakic group. The Farnsworth-Munsell (FM) 100-hue test was administered to each subject twice under different conditions. The phakic and AcrySof Natural SN60AT groups were tested under photopic and mesopic conditions. The SA60AT subjects were further divided into subgroups (with and without yellow clip-on lenses) and tested under photopic and mesopic conditions.A 1-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) of the square-root-transformed total error score showed no statistical differences (P = .637) between the treatment groups. Similarly, a 1-way ANOVA of the red-green error score (P = .729) and blue-yellow error score (P = .484) indicated no statistically significant differences between the treatment groups. The ANOVA results of the FM 100-hue test under mesopic conditions showed that the total error score in the AcrySof Natural IOL group was significantly lower (P = .046) than in the phakic group. There were no between-group differences in error scores under mesopic conditions.The FM 100-hue testing showed no difference in color perception between subjects with AcrySof Natural IOLs and those in an age-matched phakic control group or in those with a UV-only filtering AcrySof IOL with or without yellow clip-on lenses.Intraindividual comparison of a blue-light filter on visual function: AF-1 (UY) versus AF-1 (UV) intraocular lens.To evaluate the effect of the AF-1 (UY) blue-light-filtering intraocular lens (IOL) with a yellow chromophore (Hoya) on visual function, including contrast vision and color perception.Five clinical ophthalmology centers in Germany.Two types of IOLs that were identical except for a blue-light filter on 1 were compared in a prospective randomized multicenter study with intraindividual comparisons. Postoperatively, uncorrected and best corrected visual acuities, pupil size, contrast vision (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study chart, functional acuity contrast test, photopic, mesopic, mesopic with glare), and color discrimination (Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue test, photopic and mesopic) were evaluated.There were no significant differences between the 2 IOLs except in color vision dependent on blue light. Color perception for blue with the blue-light-filtering IOL was significantly reduced under mesopic conditions over the 12-month follow-up and under photopic conditions over 6 months. Despite the difference, all measured total error scores were within normal range and no patient reported impaired color vision.The blue-light-filtering IOL with a yellow chromophore had no effect on contrast vision and visual acuity. However, the impairment of color perception for blue was statistically significant. The impairment of the blue perception did not exceed the normal range or induce subjective disturbance of color vision.[The clinical investigation of early visual function in cataract patients after implantation with aspheric intraocular lens].To initially evaluate the early visual function after implantation with aspheric intraocular lensEighty-eight subjects (91 eyes) were divided randomly into three groups: AcrySof IQ (SN60WF) group, KS-3Ai group and AcrySof Natural (SN60AT) group. Best corrected visual acuity was observed 1 day, 1 week and 1 month postoperatively, while contrast sensitivity and subjective vision were observed 1 month later.Best corrected visual acuity was obviously better in KS-3Ai group than in the other groups 1 day postoperatively (P < 0.05), but no significant difference was found 1 week and 1 month later among the groups (P > 0.05). When the pupil diameter was in 2.5 to 4.0 mm and 5.0 to 6.0 mm, AcrySof IQ and KS-3Ai groups were better than the AcrySof Natural group in the low and middle spatial frequency (P < 0.05). However, there was no significant difference between AcrySof IQ and KS-3Ai groups (P > 0.05). VF/QOL questionnaire was obtained, showing that implantation with AcrySof IQ and KS-3Ai satisfied patients preferably.Aspheric intraocular lens can greatly improve patients' contrast sensitivity and quality of vision.Augmentation of macular pigment following implantation of blue light-filtering intraocular lenses at the time of cataract surgery.(Photo)-oxidative stress is believed to play a role in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration (AMD), with the threshold for retinal damage being lowest for short-wavelength (blue) light. Macular pigment (MP), consisting of the carotenoids lutein (L), zeaxanthin (Z) and meso-Z, has a maximum absorption at 460 nm and protects the retina from (photo)-oxidative injury. This study was designed to investigate whether the blue light-filtering properties of the Alcon AcrySof Natural intraocular lens (ANIOL) implanted during cataract surgery affects MP optical density (MPOD).Forty-two patients scheduled for cataract surgery were recruited for the study. These patients all had a preoperative best corrected visual acuity rating (BCVAR) of at least 0.5 (logMAR) in the study eye. The patients were randomized to have either the standard Alcon AcrySof three-piece acrylic intraocular lens (AIOL) (controls) or the ANIOL implanted at the time of cataract surgery. The spatial profile of MPOD (i.e., at 0.25 degrees, 0.5 degrees, 1.0 degrees, and 1.75 degrees eccentricity) was measured with customized heterochromatic flicker photometry (cHFP) 1 week before and 1 week after surgery, and at 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery. Serum concentrations of L and Z were also measured at each study visit.There was a highly significant and positive correlation between all MPODs (e.g., at 0.25 degrees) recorded 1 week before and after surgery in eyes with an AIOL implant (r = 0.915, P < 0.01; paired samples t-test, P = 0.631) and in those ANIOL implants (r = 0.868, P < 0.01; paired samples t-test, P = 0.719). Average MPOD across the retina increased significantly with time (after 3 months) in the ANIOL group (repeated-measures, general linear model, P < 0.05), but remained stable in the AIOL group (repeated-measures, general linear model, P > 0.05). There were no significant time or lens effects observed for serum L over the study period (P > 0.05). There was a significant time effect for serum Z over the study period (P < 0.05), but not a significant time/lens interaction (P > 0.05).Customized HFP can reliably measure the MPOD spatial profile in the presence of lens opacity, and cataract surgery does not artifactually alter MPOD readings. This study also provides evidence that implanting an IOL that filters blue light is associated with augmentation of MPOD in the absence of raised serum concentrations of L and Z. However, further and longitudinal study is needed to assess whether the observed increase in MPOD after implantation of blue-filtering IOLs is associated with reduced risk of AMD development and/or progression.Correlation between contrast sensitivity and higher-order aberration based on pupil diameter after cataract surgery.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the correlation between contrast sensitivity and calculated higher-order aberrations based on individual natural pupil diameter after cataract surgery.This prospective study included 120 eyes from 92 patients who were randomized to receive one of four lenses, including three aspheric lenses (Acrysof SN60WF, Tecnis ZA9000, and Hoya Py60AD) and one spherical lens (Acrysof SN60AT). Contrast sensitivity, higher-order aberrations of the whole eye, and pupil diameter under photopic and mesopic conditions were measured 1 month postoperatively. Higher-order aberrations were decomposed into Zernike coefficients, calculated according to individual pupil diameter. The correlation between higher-order aberrations and contrast sensitivity was evaluated.There were no significant differences in contrast sensitivity function between the four types of lenses under photopic conditions. However, the contrast sensitivity function and area under log contrast sensitivity function in the aspheric lenses were significantly better than in the spherical lens under mesopic conditions. Under mesopic conditions, spherical aberration in eyes with aspheric lenses was significantly lower than in eyes with spherical lenses (P < 0.05). Under photopic conditions, coma aberration had a significant negative correlation with contrast sensitivity at 12 cycles/degree. Under mesopic conditions, spherical aberration had a significant negative correlation with contrast sensitivity at 3, 6, and 12 cycles/degree with glare, and with contrast sensitivity at 6 and 18 cycles/degree without glare.In terms of influence on visual function, coma aberration may be more significant under photopic conditions and spherical aberration under mesopic conditions.Visual quality assessment in patients with orange-tinted blue light-filtering and clear ultraviolet light-filtering intraocular lenses.To evaluate potential differences in the quality of vision after implantation of a blue light-filtering intraocular lens (IOL) and an ultraviolet (UV) light-filtering IOL.Department of Ophthalmology, Ruhr-University, Bochum, Germany.Prospective randomized cohort study.Patients with age-related cataract had bilateral standardized small-incision Kelman phacoemulsification-based cataract surgery with implantation of a blue light-filtering IOL (Oculaid PC 440Y Orange Series) in 1 eye and a UV light-filtering IOL (Oculaid PC 430 Elite Series) in the other eye. Outcome measures included scotopic and photopic corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) and photopic uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA), color discrimination, and contrast sensitivity with and without glare. A questionnaire was used to assess patient satisfaction. Postoperative follow-up visits were scheduled at 1, 3, and 6 months.Twenty-two patients (44 eyes) completed the study. There were no statistically significant differences in UDVA, CDVA, or contrast sensitivity with or without glare between the 2 IOL groups. Color discrimination was significantly decreased in eyes with blue light-filtering IOLs compared with UV light-filtering IOLs, except along the red-green axis (P=.118). No subjective differences in color or light perception were found.Both IOL types provided similar postoperative visual function except color perception, which was slightly better in eyes with a clear IOL. Although differences were not clinically significant, information about potential disturbances in color vision might be provided before implanting an orange blue light-filtering IOL.No author has a financial or proprietary interest in any material or method mentioned.Do blue-light filtering intraocular lenses affect visual function?To study different aspects of visual function, macular changes, and subjective differences between the eye with an ultraviolet (UV) and blue-light filtering intraocular lens (IOL) and the fellow eye with a UV-light filtering IOL.Thirty patients (60 eyes) with senile cataract had both cataracts extracted, and an IOL was implanted at least 2 years before clinical evaluation. In one eye, AcrySof SA60AT (a UV-light filtering IOL) was implanted, whereas in the contralateral eye, AcrySof IQ SN60WF (a blue-light filtering IOL) was implanted. Each patient underwent visual acuity testing, color vision testing (Ishihara and Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue tests), and contrast sensitivity (CS) testing. The macula was evaluated with optical coherence tomography and with clinical examination. Patients were asked if they noted any difference between the implanted IOLs concerning visual impression. Subjective visual quality was evaluated using the National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire.There was a borderline statistically significant difference in the mean best-corrected visual acuity (p = 0.05). As regards color vision, no significant changes in Ishihara and Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue error scores were detected between both eyes (p = 0.48 and p = 0.59, respectively). Analysis of CS showed no significant difference between the groups at any spatial frequency. There were also no statistically significant differences in central macular thickness and total macular volume between the two IOL groups (p = 0.72 and p = 0.61, respectively). In both IOL groups, three eyes developed an epiretinal membrane, and six eyes developed early signs of age-related macular degeneration.This study showed no significant effects of a blue-light filtering IOL on visual acuity and no influence on color perception and CS. After more than 2 years, there were no significant differences in macular changes between the IOL groups. Clinical evidence of the effect of a blue-light filtering IOL on macular protection is still lacking.Effects of blue light-filtering intraocular lenses on the macula, contrast sensitivity, and color vision after a long-term follow-up.To evaluate the possible side effects and potential protection 5 years after implantation of an intraocular lens (IOL) with a blue-light filter (yellow tinted).Ophthalmology Department, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.Prospective randomized clinical study.Patients with bilateral visually significant cataract randomly received an ultraviolet (UV) and blue light-filtering IOL (Acrysof Natural SN60AT) in 1 eye and an acrylic UV light-filtering only IOL (Acrysof SA60AT) in the fellow eye. The primary outcome measures were contrast sensitivity, color vision, and macular findings 5 years after surgery.The study enrolled 60 eyes of 30 patients. There were no significant clinical or optical coherence tomography findings in terms of age-related macular degeneration in any eye. There were no statistically significant differences in central macular thickness between the 2 IOL groups (P=.712). There were also no significant between-group differences under photopic or scotopic conditions at any spatial frequency studied. No statistically significant differences in the color discrimination test were found between the 2 IOL groups (P=.674).After 5 years, there were no significant differences in color perception, scotopic contrast sensitivity, or photopic contrast sensitivity between the blue light-filtering (yellow-tinted) IOL and the IOL with a UV-light filter only (untinted). The potential advantage of the tinted IOL in providing protection to macular cells remains unclear.Comparison of visual performance with blue light-filtering and ultraviolet light-filtering intraocular lenses.To compare the contrast sensitivity, glare, color perception, and visual acuity at different light intensities with yellow-tinted and clear intraocular lenses (IOLs) by different manufacturers.Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Retinology and Biomicroscopic Laser-Surgery, Department of Ophthalmology, Rudolf Foundation Clinic, Vienna, Austria.Comparative case series.Eyes were randomized to 1 of the following IOLs: AF-1 (UY) (yellow tinted), AcrySof SN60AT (yellow tinted), AF-1 (UV) (clear), or AcrySof SA60AT (clear). One week and 2 months postoperatively, monocular contrast sensitivity function and color discrimination were tested and the corrected distance and near visual acuities were evaluated. All tests were performed under different light intensities (10 to 1000 lux).Of the 80 patients enrolled, 76 completed the study; there were 37 eyes in the yellow-tinted IOL group and 39 in the clear IOL group. There were no significant differences between yellow-tinted IOLs and clear IOLs except in color vision under mesopic conditions (10 lux). Patients with a yellow-tinted IOL made significantly more mistakes in the blue-light spectrum than patients with clear IOLs (P = .00015). There was no significant difference under photopic conditions (1000 lux).The yellow-tinted IOLs were equivalent to the clear IOLs in postoperative contrast sensitivity, visual acuity, and color perception under photopic conditions. Patients with yellow-tinted IOLs made statistically significantly more mistakes in the blue range under dim light than patients with clear IOLs.Feasibility of spherical aberration correction with aspheric intraocular lenses in cataract surgery based on individual pupil diameter.To evaluate the feasibility of correcting spherical aberration with aspheric intraocular lenses (IOLs) in cataract surgery based on individual pupil diameter.Keio University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.In this prospective study, eyes having cataract surgery were divided into 4 groups based on IOL type: aspheric SN (AcrySof SN60WF), aspheric ZA (Tecnis ZA9003), aspheric PY (Hoya PY-60 AD), and spherical (AcrySof Natural SN60AT). Postoperative higher-order aberrations (HOAs) of the cornea and whole eye and the pupil diameter under photopic and mesopic conditions were measured. The HOA was calculated using the individual pupil diameter. The correlation between corneal and ocular spherical aberrations and pupil diameter was evaluated.Each group comprised 30 eyes. Ocular spherical aberrations were significantly lower than corneal spherical aberrations under mesopic conditions in the aspheric SN group, the aspheric ZA group, and the aspheric PY group (P<.05); there was no significant difference between the aberrations in the spherical group. Linear regression showed significant correlations between postoperative corneal and ocular spherical aberrations (beta = 0.39, aspheric SN; beta = 0.38, aspheric ZA; beta = 0.58, aspheric PY; beta = 0.79, spherical). The differences in corneal and ocular spherical aberrations were significantly correlated with pupil diameter in the aspheric IOL groups but not in the spherical IOL group.The amount of spherical aberration correction by aspheric IOLs varied depending on IOL type and individual pupil diameter. The linear regression equation in this study may make it possible to customize postoperative ocular spherical aberration after cataract surgery.Comparison of photochromic, yellow, and clear intraocular lenses in human eyes under photopic and mesopic lighting conditions.To evaluate the results of the first blue light-filtering photochromic intraocular lens (IOL) and compare them with those of a regular yellow blue light-filtering IOL and a clear ultraviolet-filtering IOL in human eyes under various lighting conditions.Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University; Beijing Ophthalmology & Visual Sciences Key Laboratory, Beijing, China.Prospective comparative clinical study.This study evaluated eyes that had implantation of 1 of the following 3 IOLs: photochromic Aurium Matrix acrylic, model 400; yellow AF-1 (UY); or clear MC611MI. All eyes were followed for 3 months. The uncorrected (UDVA) and corrected (CDVA) distance visual acuities, contrast vision (lighting 400 lux, 30 lux, 5 lux), contrast sensitivity, color vision (Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue test under 400 lux, 30 lux), and patient questionnaire responses were evaluated.The photochromic IOL group comprised 39 eyes; the yellow IOL group, 41 eyes; and the clear IOL group, 38 eyes. There were no significant differences between the 3 IOLs in UDVA, CDVA, contrast sensitivity, or questionnaire responses. The photochromic group had significantly better color vision than the yellow IOL group at 30 lux and better contrast vision at 5% contrast (P < .05); however, there were no significant differences between the photochromic IOL group and the clear IOL group (P > .05).The photochromic blue light-filtering IOL performed as well as the yellow and clear IOLs under photopic conditions. Under mesopic conditions, the yellow IOL gave poor color vision and contrast sensitivity.Objective and subjective outcomes in comparing three different aspheric intraocular lens implants with their spherical counterparts.To look for objective and subjective differences between three types of aspheric intraocular lens implants and their spherical counterparts.Thirty patients were randomised to receive one of six lens implants including three aspheric lenses and their spherical counterparts. Pre and postoperative testing was carried out including visual acuity, contrast sensitivity and wavefront analysis. All patients were asked to fill in a visual function questionnaire (modification of cataract TyPE) to assess subjective differences in visual quality.There was no significant difference between groups for best-corrected visual acuity. Contrast sensitivity testing showed the Tecnis lens to perform better than the Cee-on Edge in all lighting conditions with significant differences at 3 and/or 6 cycles/degree in three out of four lighting conditions. No significant differences in contrast sensitivity were seen between the other lens pairs. All aspheric lenses showed less spherical aberration than their spherical pairs with statistical significance reached in two out of three pairs (the Ceeon Edge vs Tecnis, and Acrysof Natural vs IQ). The questionnaire revealed no evidence of improved subjective vision with the aspheric lenses compared to the spherical lenses.This pilot study concurs with previously published trials in showing decreased spherical aberration and improved contrast sensitivity with aspheric lenses compared to spherical lenses. There was no evidence that the patients implanted with aspheric lenses rate their quality of vision higher than those implanted with spherical lenses. Study numbers were small and larger numbers may be required to demonstrate statistical differences in subjective data.Visual outcomes with the yellow intraocular lens.To compare postoperative best distance visual acuity (VA), contrast sensitivity and colour perception with the blue light-filtering AcrySof Natural (SN60AT) and AcrySof single-piece (SA60AT) intraocular lenses (IOLs).This was a prospective, randomized, comparative, interventional study comparing postoperative performance between the SN60 and SA60 IOLs. There were nine patients (nine eyes) in the SN60 group and 10 patients (10 eyes) in the SA60 group. All patients were operated using phacoemulsification. Postoperative VA (Snellen chart), contrast sensitivity (Pelli-Robson contrast sensitivity chart) and colour perception (Farnsworth-Munsell D-15 panel test) were measured at 1, 3 and 6 months postoperatively.Postoperative best corrected VA after 6 months was 20/20 or better in 89% of SN60 eyes and 100% of SA60 eyes. Postoperative contrast sensitivity scores improved significantly in both groups under both photopic and mesopic conditions. There were no statistically significant differences in contrast sensitivity scores between the SN60 and SA60 groups at any of the postoperative evaluation time-points. Postoperative colour perception improved significantly in both the SN60 and SA60 groups, and there were no statistically significant differences in colour perception performance between the two groups.The blue light-filtering AcrySof Natural (SN60) IOL has postoperative visual performance comparable with that of the AcrySof single-piece (SA60) IOL.Contrast sensitivity and color perception with orange and yellow intraocular lenses.To evaluate contrast sensitivity function (CSF) and color vision after implantation of either orange or yellow-tinted intraocular lenses (IOLs).Fifty-six eyes of 28 cataract patients who had bilateral implantation of orange-tinted (PC440Y Orange, Ophtec), yellow-tinted (AcrySof Natural SN60AT, Alcon), or clear (AcrySof SA60AT, Alcon) IOLs were examined. Six months postoperatively, monocular CSF under photopic and mesopic (with and without glare) conditions were measured using the Functional Visual Analyzer. Color discrimination was determined with the Farnsworth-Munsell 100-Hue test.Patients implanted with orange-tinted, yellow-tinted, or clear IOLs displayed similar CSF values, with no statistically significant differences at any spatial frequency (p>0.05). There were no statistically significant differences in chromatic discrimination among the 3 groups of patients (p>0.05).Orange or yellow blue-filtering IOL implantation is comparable to a clear IOL in terms of photopic and mesopic contrast sensitivity or color discrimination.Effect on contrast sensitivity after clear, yellow and orange intraocular lens implantation.The objective of this study is to evaluate contrast sensitivity function (CSF) after clear, yellow- and orange-tinted intraocular lens (IOL) implantation. This was a prospective randomized study of 98 patients with senile cataract for a period of 6 months from day 1 of August 2014 to day 31 of January 2015. After phacoemulsification, 33 patients were implanted with clear IOLs (AcrySof UV-filtering IOL, SA60AT), 32 patients were implanted with yellow coloured IOLs (AcrySof Natural blue-light-attenuating and UV-filtering IOL, SN60AT with IMPRUV(®) filter) and 33 patients were implanted with orange-tinted blue-filtering IOLs (PC440Y Optech). After 1 month, monocular CSF was done under photopic (85 cd/m(2)) and mesopic (3 cd/m(2)) illumination condition with CSV-1000 test. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) after 1 month was 0.021 ± 0.058 logMAR for clear lens, 0.022 ± 0.059 logMAR for yellow lens and 0.019 ± 0.065 logMAR for orange lens (p = 0.989). Uniocular average photopic contrast sensitivity was 1.36 ± 0.19, 1.43 ± 0.18 and 1.46 ± 0.15 log units for clear lens, yellow lens and orange lens, respectively (statistically not significant; p = 0.076). Average mesopic contrast sensitivity was 1.02 ± 0.21 log units for clear lens, 1.00 ± 0.17 log units for yellow lens and 0.99 ± 0.15 log units for orange lens (statistically not significant; p = 0.771). Yellow or orange coloured blue-filtering IOLs are comparable to clear IOLs in terms of photopic and mesopic contrast sensitivity. Do intraocular lenses with ultraviolet absorbing chromophores protect against macular oedema?In a prospective study, designed to test the effect of intraocular lenses containing an ultraviolet absorbing chromophore on the incidence of post-operative cystoid macular oedema, 55 patients undergoing extracapsular cataract extraction were randomly allocated to receive intraocular lenses with or without an ultra-violet absorbing chromophore. Post-operative fluorescein angiography showed no difference in the incidence of macular oedema in those patients receiving an intraocular lens with an ultraviolet absorbing chromophore compared with patients receiving a standard posterior chamber intraocular lens.Blue light-filter intraocular lenses in vitrectomy combined with cataract surgery: results of a randomized controlled clinical trial.To evaluate the effect of the blue light-filter intraocular lenses (IOLs) in vitrectomy combined with cataract surgery, focusing on the surgeon's ability to perform specific vitreoretinal procedures and on the patients' outcome.Randomized clinical trial.Sixty patients, recruited from our outpatient department, were assigned randomly to receive an ultraviolet-filter IOL (clear IOL group) or a blue light-filter IOL (yellow IOL group) combined with a vitreoretinal procedure. Main outcome measures were intraoperative conditions for the surgeon and the functional outcome. Second outcome measures were complication rates and vitreoretinal diagnoses.The questionnaire responses showed that the blue light-filter IOLs did not represent an impediment to vitreoretinal surgery (P>.05). No intraoperative complications were encountered in either group. Patients in both IOL groups showed comparable functional results with respect to visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, color vision, and glare effect (P>.05). The functional outcome was influenced significantly by the vitreoretinal diagnosis (P<.01).With the possible advantage of macular protection and no intraoperative or functional disadvantage, the routine use of the blue light-filter IOL in combined surgery can be recommended.Visual function in patients with yellow tinted intraocular lenses compared with vision in patients with non-tinted intraocular lenses.To compare the visual function in patients with short wavelength blue light blocking yellow tinted intraocular lenses (IOLs) with that in patients with non-tinted IOLs.74 patients scheduled for bilateral cataract surgery underwent implantation of either yellow IOLs (HOYA YA60BB) or non-tinted IOLs (VA60BB) in both eyes. Contrast visual acuity with and without a glare source was measured under photopic (100 cd/m2) and mesopic (slightly higher luminance than typically used-5 cd/m2) conditions at 2 weeks and 3 months after surgery using the contrast sensitivity accurate tester. Visual acuity and the incidence of patients who noted cyanopsia were also examined.No significant differences between the yellow tinted and non-tinted IOL groups were observed in mean visual acuity or in photopic or higher luminance mesopic contrast visual acuity with and without glare source at either 2 weeks or 3 months after surgery. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in contrast visual acuity loss as a result of glare. The incidence of patients who noticed cyanopsia was significantly less in the yellow tinted IOL group than in the non-tinted IOL group at 2 weeks after surgery (p = 0.0234), but no patients reported cyanopsia at 3 months.Visual function in patients with yellow tinted IOLs is virtually the same as that in patients with non-tinted IOLs.Impact of cataract surgery on sleep in patients receiving either ultraviolet-blocking or blue-filtering intraocular lens implants.Although visual impairment is a well-recognized consequence of cataract development, little is known about the ability of the melanopsin-based photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (pRGCs) to regulate sleep-wake timing in the presence of cataract. In this study, we replaced a cataractous natural crystalline lens with two different types of artificial intraocular lenses, a UV-blocking lens or a blue-filtering lens. We investigated the level of sleep disturbance before cataract surgery and any change in sleep due to improved light transmission following surgery and compared this in both types of intraocular lens.Quality of sleep in 961 patients undergoing cataract surgery was assessed by administering the validated self-reported Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) questionnaire. The PSQI distinguishes good sleepers from poor sleepers by scoring seven different sleep components over the last month, which are combined to produce an overall score for sleep quality. Patients received either an ultraviolet-blocking (UVB) clear intraocular lens (IOL) or a blue-filtering (BF) IOL. Questionnaires were completed four times: 1 month preoperatively and again 1, 6 (UVB-IOL only), and 12 months postoperatively.Half of the patients reported poor sleep in the presence of cataract in both the UVB-IOL (mean PSQI = 6.35; SD = 3.82) and BF-IOL (mean PSQI = 6.39; SD = 4.04) groups. Cataract removal improved overall sleep quality significantly 1 month postoperatively in the UVB-IOL (mean PSQI = 5.89; SD = 3.71) and BF-IOL (mean PSQI = 6.08; SD = 3.88) groups. Sleep latency also improved for the UVB-IOL (preoperative mean = 1.16; SD = 1.003) and BF-IOL (preoperative mean = 1.17; SD = 1.03) groups at 1 month (UVB-IOL group mean = 1.01; SD = 0.923 and BF-IOL group mean = 1.00; SD = 0.95), which was sustained at 6 months for the UVB-IOL group (mean = 1.02; SD = 0.93) and 12 months for both the UVB-IOL and BF-IOL groups (6 months: UVB-IOL group mean = 0.96; SD = 0.92 and for the BF-IOL group mean = 0.99; SD = 0.96).Overall sleep quality and sleep latency improves after removal of cataract irrespective of the type of IOL implanted. These data show that implantation of BF-IOL does not have a negative impact on the sleep-wake cycle.AcrySof Natural SN60AT versus AcrySof SA60AT intraocular lens in patients with color vision defects.To determine whether implantation of the AcrySof Natural intraocular lens (IOL) worsened the severity of existing color deficit in congenital partial red-green color deficient individuals (CPRG).A prospective controlled randomized double-masked analysis of 30 consecutive patients with CPRG defect and bilateral cataracts received a Natural IOL (test group) in 1 eye and a single-piece AcrySof IOL (control group) in the other eye. Patients were tested unilaterally to detect CPRG defect using Ishihara pseudoisochromatic plates and the Farnsworth D-15 test. Plates 1 to 21 measured the Ishihara error score; plates 22 to 25 indicated severity of defect based on clarity of both numerals as partial mild/moderate (both visible), partial severe defect (only 1 visible). The D-15 test is based on number of diametrical crossings on the circular diagram; severity is graded as mild (1 crossing), moderate (2 crossings), or severe (>2 crossings). Tests were performed before and after IOL implantation at 1, 3, and 6 months. At mean follow-up of 6.13 months +/- 1.2 (SD), analysis of variance test judged the difference in error scores and cross tabulation represented change in number of diametrical crossings.The mean age was 62.3 +/- 8.5 years. All patients were men. Before IOL implantation, all patients had moderate CPRG defect on both tests. The Ishihara error score in the test and control groups did not reveal statistically significant differences (P = .505 and P = .119, respectively). With D-15, none of the patients in the test or control group showed >2 crossings.The implantation of AcrySof Natural IOL did not worsen the preexisting severity of color defect in CPRG individuals.The effect of blue-blocking and neutral intraocular lenses on circadian photoentrainment and sleep one year after cataract surgery.To compare the long-term effect on circadian photoentrainment and sleep in patients implanted with neutral and blue-blocking intraocular lenses 1 year after cataract surgery.Randomized, controlled trial involving 67 patients with age-related cataract. Intervention was cataract surgery with implantation of either a neutral or a blue-blocking intraocular lens (IOL). Main outcome was activation of the intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells (ipRGC) measured by chromatic pupillometry. The circadian rhythm was analysed by 24-hr melatonin profiles and actigraphy; the latter was also used to determine objective sleep quality. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index determined subjective sleep quality.One year after surgery, peak melatonin concentration was 3.3 pg/ml (95% CI, 2-5.5) corresponding to 50% lower for the participants allocated to blue-blocking IOLs compared with participants allocated to neutral IOLs. Compared with preoperative levels, the ipRGC response had increased by 13.7% (95% confidence interval [CI], 3.2-22.6) 1 year after surgery. Objective sleep quality was also improved as the time of wakefulness after sleep onset had improved by 5 min (95% CI, 1-10) for the entire population while sleep efficiency had increased by two percentage points (95% CI, 0.42-3.65) although exclusively, for the participants allocated to blue-blocking IOLs.Blue-blocking IOLs increased sleep efficiency but lowered nocturnal melatonin secretion compared with neutral IOLs. Cataract surgery improved the response of ipRGCs and sleep quality. However, the effect of cataract surgery on sleep quality may be unrelated to circadian photoentrainment.Comparison of pseudophakic visual quality in spherical and aspherical intraocular lenses.This study compares the visual performance of spherical and aspherical intraocular lenses (IOLs) by measuring higher-order aberration and contrast sensitivity (CS) values.Prospective controlled study.Fifty-seven patients with age-related cataract (61 eyes).Patients were randomly allocated to 1 of 3 groups and implanted with either aspherical IOLs, Acrysof IQ (SN60WF) or Tecnis Z9001, or a spherical IOL, Acrysof Natural. Patients underwent routine examinations, including visual acuity, slit-lamp checks, and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), as well as measurement of higher-order aberrations and CS values, preoperatively and at 1 week, 1 month, and 2 months postoperatively.All the patients had a BCVA better than 20/30 postoperatively. The spherical aberrations of the IQ group and Tecnis group were both lower than in the Natural (control) group (IQ: p < 0.05; Tecnis: p < 0.05); there was no significant difference in coma and higher-order aberration. No statistically significant difference was found in spherical aberration, coma, or higher-order aberration between the IQ and Tecnis groups. Under glare conditions, the CS values of the 2 aspherical IOLs were obviously better (IQ: p < 0.05; Tecnis: p < 0.05) than the CS value of the spherical IOL group at low frequency (IQ: 6.3 degrees, Tecnis: 4.0 degrees); under non-glare conditions there was a significant difference in CS values between the aspherical IOL groups and the control group (IQ: p < 0.01; Tecnis: p < 0.01) at low frequency (both 6.3 degrees). There was no statistical difference between the IQ and the Tecnis groups with or without glare.An aspherical IOL can effectively reduce spherical aberration after cataract surgery, enhance CS values, and improve visual quality compared with traditional spherical IOLs for age-related cataract. However, there was no statistically significant difference in postoperative aberration and CS values between the Acrysof IQ and Tecnis Z9001 aspherical IOLs.Contrast sensitivity and glare disability after implantation of AcrySof IQ Natural aspherical intraocular lens: prospective randomized masked clinical trial.To evaluate contrast sensitivity and glare disability after implantation of an AcrySof IQ Natural SN60WF aspherical intraocular lens (IOL) (Alcon Laboratories).Iladevi Cataract & IOL Research Centre, Ahmedabad, India.One hundred twenty consecutive patients who had phacoemulsification in a prospective triple-masked trial were randomized to receive an AcrySof SA60AT IOL (40 eyes), AcrySof Natural SN60AT IOL (40 eyes), or AcrySof IQ SN60WF IOL (40 eyes). At 3 months, contrast sensitivity was measured using the CSV-1000E contrast sensitivity chart test face (Vector Vision) at 3, 6, 12, and 18 cycles per degrees (cpd) under photopic conditions (85 cd/m(2)) and mesopic conditions (2.7 cd/m(2)) with 4.0 mm and 6.0 mm fixed central apertures, with and without glare. The Kruskal-Wallis test was used and a pair-wise comparison performed. The main outcome measure was the difference in contrast sensitivity between IOLs at each spatial frequency.The best corrected visual acuity was similar between the 3 IOL groups (P = .6). The AcrySof IQ group had significantly higher contrast sensitivity at 18 cpd under photopic conditions (P = .008); at 3, 6, 12, and 18 cpd during mesopic testing with a 4.0 mm aperture without glare (P = .018, P = .011, P = .007, and P = .0001, respectively) and with glare (P = .003, P = .006, P = .005, and P = .004, respectively); and at all spatial frequencies during mesopic testing with a 6.0 mm aperture without glare (P = .018, P = .006, P = .009, and P = .0001, respectively) and with glare (P = .019, P = .002, P = .01, and P = .017, respectively).Eyes with the AcrySof IQ SN60WF IOL had significantly higher contrast sensitivity than eyes with an AcrySof SA60AT or AcrySof Natural SN60AT IOL at all spatial frequencies during mesopic testing (with and without glare) with 4.0 and 6.0 mm artificial pupil.Contrast sensitivity and color vision with a yellow intraocular len.To evaluate contrast sensitivity and color vision of yellow ultraviolet (UV) intraocular len (IOL) in cataract patients.Randomized clinical trial.Extracapsular cataract extraction was performed in 60 senile cataract patients. The patients were randomly assigned to receive 30 yellow UV IOLs and 30 ordinary UV IOLs. Visual acuity, contrast sensitivity, and color vision were examined up to 6 months postoperatively.The yellow UV IOLs showed statistically significantly higher spatial contrast sensitivity than ordinary UV IOLs in the low and middle frequencies. There was no significant difference between yellow and ordinary UV IOL in color vision. Incidences of photophobia and cyanopsia were less in patients who received the yellow UV IOLs.Yellow UV IOLs are preferable to ordinary UV IOLs in preserving spatial contrast sensitivity and cause less photophobia and cyanopsia in the early postoperative period.[Intraocular lenses with blue light filter].To evaluate if a SN60AT <Natural> IOL (Alcon) with IMPRUV filter (Alcon) offers any advantage in patients having cataract surgery, as compared with Acrysof SA60 IOL (Alcon).This was a prospective analytical study. We studied sixty-four eyes from 32 patients with cataracts. After a random assignment, phacoemulsification with the implant was performed using the Acrysof SN60AT tinted lens in one eye and Acrysof SA60 in the other. A variety of variables was subsequently assessed: contrast sensitivity with a CSV 1000E test, colour perception through a Farnsworth 25 test and subjective measures by a patient survey. Differences between the groups were assessed statistically.The contrast sensitivity results were obtained for 3, 6, 12 and 18 cycles per degree (cpd) frequencies under scotopic conditions, with better results obtained following the use of SN60AT: 0.75 (CSV 1000E test units) for 3 cpd, 0.86 for 6 cpd, 0.54 for 12 cpd and 0.35 for 18 cpd. The differences were statistically significant between the two groups for 3 cpd and 6 cpd. A total of 62.5% of patients using a tinted lens and 50% with SA60 achieved good results in the Farnsworth test; 12.5% and 21% had fair results and 25% and 28.1% respectively had poor results.We obtained an improvement in favour of the tinted lens for all frequencies, with this being statistically significant at lower frequencies (3 and 6 cpd). No significant differences in the Farnsworth test performance or in the patient survey were found. The tinting provided by the IMPRUV filter brings an increase in contrast sensitivity without affecting colour perception.Colour vision and retinal nerve fibre layer photography in patients with an Acrysof Natural intraocular lens.To study colour vision and retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL) photographs in patients with an Acrysof Natural intraocular lens (IOL).We carried out a randomized double-blind study. An Acrysof Natural IOL (model SN60AT) was implanted in 25 eyes of 19 patients and an Acrysof IOL (model SA60AT) was implanted in 27 eyes of 18 control patients. The patients returned for colour vision tests and fundus photography 1-6 months after the surgery.Standard pseudoisochromatic plates, part 2, were correctly interpreted and the Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue test (FM 100) total and individual box scores were normal in all IOL eyes. In the FM 100 hue test there were no significant differences in the results of the total error scores or the error scores of the individual boxes between the eyes with Acrysof Natural and those with Acrysof lenses. The yellow coloration of the Acrysof Natural IOL did not affect the visibility of the RNFL in photographs.The Acrysof Natural IOL did not affect colour vision in the tested patients, even in the blue region of the spectrum, and can be implanted in patients who need to have normal colour vision for the purposes of their occupation. The Acrysof Natural IOL does not interfere with RNFL photography and can also be used in patients with glaucoma.[Evaluation of colour vision according to type of implanted artificial foldable intraocular lens].The aim of research was comparing the colour vision of patients with blue light filtering artificial lens to the patients with implant without blue light filter.99 patients (120 eyes) divided on three groups were examined. 40 patients (40 eyes) after cataract surgery with implantation of blue light filtering lens were the first group. 39 patients (40 eyes) who had implanted lens without filter were the second group. 20 patients (40 eyes) with own transparent lens were the third group. Farnsworth-Munsell 100 Hue test was used in research. Each patient made test on thirtieth day after cataract surgery.Following average total error score (TES) values in groups were observed: the first group--60.66, the second group--83.71, the third group--61.55. Average axis of disorder in blue-yellow range was following: patients after cataract surgery with implantation of blue light filtering lens--5.48, patients with implant without blue light filter--7.28, control group--5.74.1. Kind of artificial intraocular lens has meaning in colour vision at pseudophakic patients. 2. Blue light filter of artificial intraocular foldable lens advantageously effects perception of colours. 3. Lack of blue light filter in artificial intraocular lens gets worse colour vision especially in blue-yellow range.Quality-of-life improvements in cataract patients with bilateral blue light-filtering intraocular lenses: clinical trial.To compare change in patient-reported vision-related and health-related functioning and quality of life (HRQOL) following bilateral implantation with a new blue light-filtering intraocular lens (IOL) with the results of a similar IOL that does not filter blue light.Six clinical sites in the United States.Patients were from 6 clinical sites in the United States that performed a high volume of cataract surgeries. The HRQOL assessments occurred via telephone while patients were at home. Patients requiring bilateral cataract extraction were randomly assigned to 1 of the 2 IOL groups for the first eye. The second eye was later implanted with the same type of IOL. Patients and HRQOL data collectors were treatment-masked, but investigators could not be. Health-related functioning and quality of life was measured with the 39-item National Eye Institute Visual Functioning Questionnaire (NEI VFQ-39) and 12-item Short Form Health Survey (SF-12). Assessments were at baseline before implantation in the first eye and 30 to 60 days and 120 to 180 days after implantation of the lens in the second eye.Both IOL types improved most aspects of patients' HRQOL including color vision and driving. The largest gains occurred on the VFQ composite, general vision, near activities, distance activities, driving, mental health, peripheral vision, and role difficulties scales. Significant gains also occurred on color vision and other vision-specific scales as well as the SF-12 physical component summary score. There were no significant differences in HRQOL gains between the IOLs.The blue light-filtering IOL improved color vision, driving, and other aspects of HRQOL in a manner similar to that of a lens that does not filter blue light.Prospective randomized study of clinical performance of 3 aspheric and 2 spherical intraocular lenses in 250 eyes.To compare the quality of vision with aspheric and spherical intraocular lenses (IOLs) in pseudophakic patients.This prospective, comparative, randomized study included 250 eyes of 125 patients with bilateral cataracts. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either IOLs with a spherical biconvex optic (Acrysof SN6OAT [Alcon] or Sensar AR40e [Advanced Medical Optics, AMO]) or IOLs with an aspheric optic (Acrysof IQ SN6OWF [Alcon], Tecnis Z9000 [AMO], or Sofport L161AO [Bausch & Lomb]). Ophthalmologic examination including best spectacle-corrected visual acuity, pupil size, ocular dominance investigation, contrast sensitivity under mesopic and photopic conditions, and wavefront analysis was performed 2 months postoperatively.Aspheric IOLs showed better contrast sensitivity compared to spherical IOLs at spatial frequencies of 6, 12, and 18 cycles per degree (cpd) under photopic conditions and at all spatial frequencies under mesopic conditions. There was no significant difference among the three aspheric IOLs at all spatial frequencies under either photopic or mesopic conditions. Mean total spherical aberration was statistically lower in dominant eyes with aspheric IOLs (0.05 +/- 0.06, 0.11 +/- 0.1, and 0.19 +/- 0.08 pm for the Tecnis Z9000, Acrysof IQ SN6OWF, and Sofport L161AO, respectively) compared with eyes with spherical IOLs (0.62 +/- 0.24 and 0.46 +/- 0.19 microm for the Acrysof SN6OAT and Sensar AR40e, respectively) for a 5-mm pupil diameter.The aspheric IOLs had less wavefront aberrations and performed better under both photopic and mesopic contrast sensitivity compared to the spherical IOLs. These findings confirm it is possible to improve the optical performance of IOLs by modifying the surfaces.Visual performance: Comparison of foldable intraocular lenses.To compare best distance visual acuity, color perception, and contrast sensitivity between eyes with an AcrySof Natural intraocular lens (IOL) (Alcon Laboratories Inc.) and fellow eye with an AcrySof IOL and to compare results in the IOL groups to those in normal, similarly aged patients with clear phakic eyes.Sri Sankaradeva Nethralaya, Guwahati, India.This prospective randomized parallel group single-center patient-masked examiner-masked study comprised 26 eyes of 13 healthy patients with bilateral age-related cataract. All patients had cataract surgery by phacoemulsification in both eyes; 1 eye received an AcrySof Natural IOL (SN60AT) and the fellow eye, an AcrySof (SA60AT) IOL. Final postoperative examination was performed at the end of 18 months. In addition to other findings, visual acuity, color perception, and contrast sensitivity were recorded. A group of normal, similarly aged phakic individuals with clear lenses was examined for contrast sensitivity. The records thus obtained were analyzed statistically.The AcrySof and AcrySof Natural IOL groups had a statistically significant improvement in visual acuity and color perception in comparison to preoperative status, and this was maintained until the last postoperative follow-up at 18 months. There was no statistically significant difference in the findings between the 2 IOL groups. The AcrySof and the AcrySof Natural IOL groups showed significant improvement in contrast sensitivity from the preoperative to the postoperative period (both P < .001). However, the AcrySof Natural IOL group was better than the AcrySof IOL group when each group was compared separately to similarly aged phakic individuals with clear lenses.Pseudophakia following AcrySof Natural SN60AT and AcrySof SA60AT IOL implantation led to equivalent visual acuity and color perception. But the contrast sensitivity in the AcrySof Natural group was better and near normal in reference to a healthy, age-matched control group.Influence of blue light-filtering intraocular lenses on retinal nerve fiber layer measurements by spectral-domain optical coherence tomography.The purpose of this study was to assess the influence of blue light-filtering intraocular lenses (IOL) on peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness measurements by spectral-domain (SD) optical coherence tomography (OCT).This prospective study included 50 eyes of 50 patients. Patients were randomly assigned to receive either a blue light-filtering IOL (acrysof IQ (SN60WF) [Alcon]) or a clear IOL (Tecnis (Z9003) [AMO]). The peripapillary RNFL thickness was measured using a Cirrus SD OCT before and 8 weeks after cataract surgery. Perioperative differences in RNFL thickness measurements and signal strengths (SS) were evaluated and compared in both IOL groups.Thirty-nine eyes of 39 patients were included in the final analysis. There was a significant increase in average RNFL thickness and SS after cataract surgery in both IOL groups. No significant difference in perioperative changes of RNFL measurements was noted between yellow and clear IOL groups. In the multivariable analysis, the factor affecting perioperative differences of RNFL measurements was not IOL type but SS.Our data suggests that blue-light filtering IOL does not influence RNFL thickness measurements by Cirrus SD-OCT.All-distance visual acuity in eyes with a nontinted or a yellow-tinted diffractive multifocal intraocular lens.To compare all-distance visual acuity (VA) between eyes with a nontinted diffractive multifocal intraocular lens (IOL), a yellow-tinted multifocal IOL, and a nontinted monofocal IOL.Thirty-four patients underwent bilateral implantation of a nontinted multifocal IOL (Alcon ReSTOR), 30 received a yellow-tinted multifocal IOL (ReSTOR Natural), and 17 a monofocal IOL. All-distance VA was measured with an all-distance vision tester at 12 months postoperatively. The relationships between pupillary diameter and IOL decentration and tilt with VA were determined.Both uncorrected and best distance-corrected near VA in the multifocal groups were significantly better than those in the monofocal group, whereas no significant differences were found in far-to-intermediate VAs. There was no significant difference in all-distance VA between the nontinted and yellow-tinted multifocal groups. In the multifocal groups, a larger pupillary diameter was associated with better near VA, whereas there was no correlation between VA and IOL decentration and tilt.Near VA with a diffractive multifocal IOL was better than that with a monofocal IOL, although far-to-intermediate VAs were similar. All-distance VA with the nontinted multifocal IOL was similar to that with the yellow-tinted multifocal IOL. Larger pupillary diameter was associated with better near VA with the multifocal IOL.The Effect of Cataract Surgery on Circadian Photoentrainment: A Randomized Trial of Blue-Blocking versus Neutral Intraocular Lenses.Cataract decreases blue light transmission. Because of the selective blue light sensitivity of the retinal ganglion cells governing circadian photoentrainment, cataract may interfere with normal sleep-wake regulation and cause sleep disturbances. The purpose was to investigate the effect of cataract surgery on circadian photoentrainment and to determine any difference between blue-blocking and neutral intraocular lenses (IOLs).The study was a single-center, investigator-driven, double-masked, block-randomized clinical trial.One eye in 76 patients with bilateral age-related cataract eligible for cataract surgery was included.Intervention was cataract surgery by phacoemulsification. Patients were randomized to receive a blue-blocking or neutral IOL.Primary outcome was activation of intrinsic photosensitive ganglion cells using post-illumination pupil response (PIPR) to blue light from 10 to 30 seconds after light exposure as a surrogate measure. Secondary outcomes were circadian rhythm analysis using actigraphy and 24-hour salivary melatonin measurements. Finally, objective and subjective sleep quality were determined by actigraphy and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index.The blue light PIPR increased 2 days (17%) and 3 weeks (24%) after surgery (P < 0.001). The majority of circadian and sleep-specific actigraphy parameters did not change after surgery. A forward shift of the circadian rhythm by 22 minutes (P = 0.004) for actigraphy and a tendency toward an earlier melatonin onset (P = 0.095) were found. Peak salivary melatonin concentration increased after surgery (P = 0.037). No difference was detected between blue-blocking and neutral IOLs, whereas low preoperative blue light transmission was inversely associated with an increase in PIPR (P = 0.021) and sleep efficiency (P = 0.048).Cataract surgery increases photoreception by the photosensitive retinal ganglion cells. Because of inconsistency between the significant findings and the many parameters that were unchanged, we can conclude that cataract surgery does not adversely affect the circadian rhythm or sleep. Longer follow-up time and fellow eye surgery may reveal the significance of the subtle changes observed. We found no difference between blue-blocking and neutral IOLs, and, because of the minor effect of surgery in itself, an effect of IOL type seems highly unlikely.Contrast sensitivity evaluation of aspheric and spherical intraocular lenses 2 years after implantation.To compare the quality of vision with aspheric and spherical intraocular lenses (IOLs) in pseudophakic patients after long-term follow-up.Two hundred eyes of 100 patients with bilateral cataracts were randomly assigned to receive spherical (Acrysof SN60AT [Alcon Laboratories Inc] or Sensar AR40e [Advanced Medical Optics Inc]) or aspheric IOLs (Acrysof SN60WF [Alcon] or Tecnis Z9000 [Advanced Medical Optics]). Ophthalmologic examination, including best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA), pupil size, ocular dominance, contrast sensitivity under mesopic and photopic conditions, and wavefront analysis, was performed 2 months and 1 and 2 years after surgery.No statistically significant differences among the four groups in terms of age, pupil diameter, postoperative BSCVA, comeal spherical aberration, and posterior capsular opacification were noted. At all followup examinations, contrast sensitivity results showed no significant differences between the two aspheric IOLs at all spatial frequencies. Under photopic conditions, significant differences (P<.05) between spherical and aspheric IOLs were detected for spatial frequencies of 12 and 18 cycles per degree (cpd) at 2 months and 2 years and 12 cpd at 1 year. Under mesopic conditions, significant differences (P<.05) were detected between spherical and aspheric IOLs for all spatial frequencies at 2 months; all spatial frequencies except 18 cpd at 1 year; and spatial frequencies of 3, 12, and 18 cpd at 2 years. In addition, aspheric IOLs had statistical reductions in total spherical aberration at all follow-up examinations (P<.01).This study confirms that implantation of a modified aspheric IOL improves functional visual performance at 2 years postoperative.Prevention of increased abnormal fundus autofluorescence with blue light-filtering intraocular lenses.To observe changes in fundus autofluorescence 2 years after implantation of blue light-filtering (yellow-tinted) and ultraviolet light-filtering (colorless) intraocular lenses (IOLs).Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan, and the Department of Ophthalmology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.Prospective comparative observational study.Patients were enrolled who had cataract surgery with implantation of a yellow-tinted or colorless IOL and for whom images were obtained on which the fundus autofluorescence was measurable using the Heidelberg Retina Angiogram 2 postoperatively. The fundus autofluorescence in the images was classified into 8 abnormal patterns based on the classification of the International Fundus Autofluorescence Classification Group, The presence of normal fundus autofluorescence, geographic atrophy, and wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD) also was recorded. The fundus findings at baseline and 2 years postoperatively were compared.Fifty-two eyes with a yellow-tinted IOL and 79 eyes with a colorless IOL were included. Abnormal fundus autofluorescence did not develop or increase in the yellow-tinted IOL group; however, progressive abnormal fundus autofluorescence developed or increased in 12 eyes (15.2%) in the colorless IOL group (P = .0016). New drusen, geographic atrophy, and choroidal neovascularization were observed mainly in the colorless IOL group. The incidence of AMD was statistically significantly higher in the colorless IOL group (P = .042).Two years after cataract surgery, significant differences were seen in the progression of abnormal fundus autofluorescence between the 2 groups. The incidence of AMD was lower in eyes with a yellow-tinted IOL.No author has a financial or proprietary interest in any material or method mentioned.Intraindividual comparison of color contrast sensitivity in patients with clear and blue-light-filtering intraocular lenses.To evaluate the effect of blue-light-filtering intraocular lenses (IOLs) with a yellow chromophore on color contrast sensitivity by intraindividual comparison with an identically designed IOL without a blue-light filter.Medical University of Vienna, Department of Ophthalmology, Vienna, Austria.Randomized implantation of an AF-1 (UV) IOL (Hoya) in 1 eye and an AF-1 (UY) IOL (Hoya) in the contralateral eye was performed after phacoemulsification and primary posterior curvilinear capsulorhexis. Three months postoperatively, the best distance-corrected visual acuity was evaluated. Before color contrast sensitivity testing, a heterochromatic flicker test was performed in both eyes to avoid error in brightness matching. Central and peripheral tritan color contrast sensitivities were evaluated using the Moorfields Vision System (CH Electronics).Visual acuity did not differ significantly between the 2 IOL groups (P>.05). The central color contrast sensitivity threshold also did not differ significantly between eyes with a clear IOL and eyes with a yellow IOL at any tested spatial frequency. The peripheral color contrast sensitivity test showed slightly higher color contrast sensitivity thresholds in eyes with a yellow IOL, although the differences were not statistically significant. Two patients independently reported subjective changes in color perception in the eye with the yellow IOL.In this intraindividual comparison, the implantation of a blue-light-filtering IOL did not lead to a clinically significant change in color contrast sensitivity.Spherical aberration and depth of focus in eyes implanted with aspheric and spherical intraocular lenses: a prospective randomized study.To compare distance-corrected, near, and intermediate visual acuities as a measurement of depth of focus and spherical aberration of eyes implanted with aspheric and spherical intraocular lenses (IOLs).Randomized prospective study.One hundred twenty eyes of 60 patients with bilateral cataract implanted with 3 IOL models (AcrySof IQ, AcrySof SN60AT [Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX], and Sensar AR40 [Allergan Surgical, Irvine, CA]).Pupil diameter was analyzed by using a Colvard pupillometer (OASIS Medical, Inc., Glendora, CA) under photopic, mesopic, and scotopic conditions. Distance (6 m), intermediate (1 m), and near (0.33 m) visual acuities were measured with distance correction in place 90 days after surgery. Wavefront analysis (LadarWave; Alcon Laboratories) was performed using 5-mm and measured photopic pupil diameter at 30 and 90 days after surgery.To evaluate spherical aberration and depth of focus (by means of distance-corrected near and intermediate visual acuity) in patients implanted with aspheric and spherical IOLs.Photopic pupil sizes in each group were similar at 30 days after surgery. At 90 days after surgery, mean logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution distance-corrected near visual acuity (+/-standard deviation [SD]) was 0.50+/-0.20 in the AcrySof IQ group, 0.38+/-0.17 in the AcrySof SN60AT group, and 0.45+/-0.16 in Sensar AR40 group. Mean spherical aberration values (+/-SD) were 0.03+/-0.05 microm in the AcrySof IQ group, 0.24+/-0.04 microm in the AcrySof SN60AT group, and 0.14+/-0.07 microm in the Sensar AR40 group. The AcrySof IQ group showed a statistically significant lower induction of spherical aberration and worse distance-corrected near visual acuity. The AcrySof SN60AT group showed statistically significant higher mean spherical aberration values and better distance-corrected near and intermediate visual acuity.The reduction of total spherical aberration after aspheric IOL implantation may degrade distance-corrected near and intermediate visual acuity.