FDG-PET/CT to predict optimal primary cytoreductive surgery in patients with advanced ovarian cancer: preliminary results.Primary cytoreductive surgery (CRS) has a significant impact on prognosis in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Patient selection is important to recognize factors limiting optimal CRS and to avoid unnecessary aggressive surgical procedures. We evaluated the contribution of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) in the presurgical identification of disease sites that may preclude EOC cytoreducibility.Patients with suspected EOC underwent 18F-FDG-PET/CT within 20 days before debulking surgery. The PET/CT results were compared with surgical findings and postsurgery histopathology in order to assess the diagnostic value.Between August 2013 and January 2014, 29 patients were evaluated. The histopathology showed 23 EOC and 6 benign tumors. The FDG-PET/CT was positive (maximum standardized uptake value [SUVmax] 11.3 ± 5.4) in 21/23 (91%) patients with EOC and provided 2 false-negatives (1 mucinous and 1 clear cell carcinoma; SUVmax ≤2.8). The FDG-PET/CT was true-negative (SUVmax 2.2 ± 1.6) in 4 out of 6 patients (67%). False-positive FDG-PET results were obtained in 2 cellular fibromas (SUVmax 4.8 and 5.6). The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of PET/CT to characterize ovarian masses were 91%, 67%, and 86%, respectively. Among the 21 FDG-PET/CT-positive EOC, we detected factors limiting optimal CRS in 6 cases (29%): 4 hepatic hilum infiltration and 2 root mesentery involvement, confirmed at surgical exploration. The FDG-PET did not find limiting factors in the remaining 15 patients (71%) in whom optimal CRS was obtained.Fluorodeoxyglucose-PET/CT shows high sensitivity but suboptimal specificity in the characterization of ovarian masses. However, PET/CT may play a role in noninvasively selecting patients with EOC who can benefit from primary CRS.Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging evaluation of intra-abdominal sites of implants to predict likelihood of suboptimal cytoreductive surgery in patients with ovarian carcinoma.To analyse the diagnostic accuracy and to establish a predictive score based on diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWMRI) compared to exploratory laparotomy (EL) for predicting suboptimal cytoreductive surgery for different intra-abdominal sites of implants in patients with ovarian cancer.Thirty-four patients with advanced ovarian carcinoma were studied. Preoperative DWMRI of the abdomen and pelvis was performed. DWMRI findings were compared with EL. Ten anatomical sites were selected for inclusion in the score. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value and accuracy for suboptimal cytoreduction were calculated for both DWMRI and EL. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to assess the ability to predict suboptimal cytoreduction.Using predictive score, ROC curves were generated with an area under the curve of 0.938 for DWMRI and 0.947 for EL (P < 0.0001). For DWMRI, a score ≥6 had the highest overall accuracy at 91.1 % and identified patients with unnecessary EL with a sensitivity of 75 %. For EL, a score ≥4 had the highest overall accuracy at 88.2 % and was able to identify patients with unnecessary EL with a sensitivity of 87.5 %.DWMRI is an emerging technique that may be useful to predict suboptimal cytoreduction in ovarian cancer.• DWMRI is increasingly used in ovarian cancer. • DWMRI is an accurate technique for depicting intra-abdominal sites of implants • DWMRI is useful for predicting optimal cytoreductive surgical outcome. • We report a high predictive value similar to exploratory laparotomy.Nomogram for predicting incomplete cytoreduction in advanced ovarian cancer patients.Accurately predicting cytoreducibility in advanced-ovarian cancer is needed to establish preoperative plans, consider neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and improve clinical trial protocols. We aimed to develop a positron-emission tomography/computed tomography-based nomogram for predicting incomplete cytoreduction in advanced-ovarian cancer patients.Between 2006 and 2012, 343 consecutive advanced-ovarian cancer patients underwent positron-emission tomography/computed tomography before primary cytoreduction: 240 and 103 patients were assigned to the model development or validation cohort, respectively. After reviewing the detailed surgical documentation, incomplete cytoreduction was defined as a remaining gross residual tumor. We evaluated each individual surgeon's surgical aggressiveness index (number of high-complex surgeries/total number of surgeries). Possible predictors, including surgical aggressiveness index and positron-emission tomography/computed tomography features, were analyzed using logistic regression modeling. A nomogram based on this model was developed and externally validated.Complete cytoreduction was achieved in 120 patients (35%). Surgical aggressiveness index and five positron-emission tomography/computed tomography features were independent predictors of incomplete cytoreduction. Our nomogram predicted incomplete cytoreduction by incorporating these variables and demonstrated good predictive accuracy (concordance index = 0.881; 95% CI = 0.838-0.923). The predictive accuracy of our validation cohort was also good (concordance index = 0.881; 95% CI = 0.790-0.932) and the predicted probability was close to the actual observed outcome. Our model demonstrated good performance across surgeons with varying degrees of surgical aggressiveness.We have developed and validated a nomogram for predicting incomplete cytoreduction in advanced-ovarian cancer patients which may help stratify patients for clinical trials, establish meticulous preoperative plans, and determine if neoadjuvant chemotherapy is warranted.Ovarian cancer: staging with CT and MR imaging.To evaluate ovarian cancer staging and tumor resectability with computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) imaging.Eighty-two women underwent CT (n = 43) or MR imaging (n = 50); eleven of these 82 underwent both. Imaging was performed within 4 weeks of surgical staging. Radiologic, surgical, and histopathologic findings were compared.Overall staging accuracy was similar for CT and MR imaging (77% [33 of 43] vs 78% [39 of 50]). Evaluation of pelvic cancer extent was better with MR imaging than with CT. There was no difference in detection of abdominal disease. Most mesenteric and small-bowel implants were not detected with either CT or MR imaging. For CT, the positive predictive value for cancer nonresectability was 100% (three of three patients); the negative predictive value was 92% (37 of 40 patients). The positive and negative predictive values for MR imaging were 91% (10 of 11 patients) and 97% (38 of 39 patients).While the staging accuracy of both CT and MR imaging is only moderate, prediction of tumor resectability is excellent.(18)F-FDG-PET/CT to select patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis for cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy.Cytoreductive surgery followed by hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) is associated with significantly longer survival in patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC). So far, no morphological imaging method has proven to accurately assess the intra-abdominal tumor spread. This study was designed to predict tumor load in patients with PC using dual-modality (18)FDG-PET/CT and to compare the results with those of PET and CT alone by correlating imaging findings with intraoperative staging.Twenty-two patients with PC from gastrointestinal (n = 13), ovarian cancer (n = 8), and mesothelioma (n = 1) underwent contrast-enhanced (18)FDG-PET/CT before surgery and HIPEC. In a retrospective analysis PET, CT, and fused PET/CT were separately and blindly reviewed for the extent of peritoneal involvement using the Peritoneal Cancer Index (PCI). Imaging results were correlated with the intraoperative PCI using Pearson's correlation coefficient and linear regression analysis.There was a strong correlation between the PCI obtained with PET/CT and the surgical PCI with respect to the total score (r = 0.951) as well as in the regional analysis (small bowel, r = 0.838; other, r = 0.703). The correlation was slightly lower for CT alone (total score, r = 0.919; small bowel, r = 0.754; other, r = 0.666) and significantly lower (p = 0.002) for PET alone (total score, r = 0.793; small bowel, r = 0.553, other, 0.507).Contrast-enhanced CT is superior compared with PET alone to predict the extent of PC. In our patient group, the combination of both modalities (contrast enhanced PET/CT) yielded the best results and proved to be a useful tool for selecting candidates for peritonectomy and HIPEC.Role of CT and MR imaging in predicting optimal cytoreduction of newly diagnosed primary epithelial ovarian cancer.To determine the relative accuracy of CT or MR imaging in the detection of inoperable tumor sites prior to cytoreductive surgery in a large series of patients with newly diagnosed primary epithelial ovarian cancer.One hundred thirty-seven women with newly diagnosed primary epithelial ovarian cancer underwent CT (n = 91) or MR imaging (n = 46) prior to cytoreductive surgery. The following imaging criteria were used to identify inoperable tumor sites: (1) peritoneal implants greater than 2 cm in maximum diameter in the porta hepatis, intersegmental fissure, gall bladder fossa, subphrenic space, gastrohepatic ligament, gastrosplenic ligament, lesser sac, or root of the small bowel mesentery; (2) retroperitoneal adenopathy greater than 2 cm in maximum diameter above the renal hila; (3) hepatic metastases or abdominal wall invasion. Imaging results were compared with operability at surgery.Cytoreductive surgery was suboptimal in 21 of the 137 (15%) patients. Sixteen of these patients had inoperable tumor on preoperative imaging, while one additional patient had apparently inoperable tumor on imaging but was optimally debulked at surgery. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of preoperative imaging for the prediction of suboptimal debulking were 76% (16/21), 99% (115/116), 94% (16/17), and 96% (115/120), respectively. CT and MR imaging were equally effective (P = 1.0) in the detection of inoperable tumor.Preoperative CT and MR imaging are equally accurate in the detection of inoperable tumor and the prediction of suboptimal debulking in newly diagnosed epithelial ovarian cancer. This suggests imaging may help select patients who might be more appropriately managed by neoadjuvant chemotherapy.MRI evaluation of bulky tumor masses in the mesentery and bladder involvement in peritoneal carcinomatosis.Peritonectomy procedures with intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia are an effective but costly treatment for peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC). Consequently a proper selection of patients is necessary. We evaluated the benefit of MRI prior to surgery, in the detection of two of the main surgery contraindications: bulky mesenteric tumors and bladder implants.Three experts retrospectively reviewed abdominal and pelvic MRI from 19 cases of surgically proved PC (ovary: 7; colorectal: 7; gastric: 2; pseudomyxoma peritonei: 2; appendix: 1).Mesenteric tumors were always identified as hypersignal masses on axial and coronal fat suppression gadolinium-enhanced T1 images (n=3). Three out of five bladder implants were detected. The two cases of bladder implants that were not detected on MRI were missed because the bladder was not filled. The best sequence for the detection of bladder involvement was axial T2-weighted images with bladder filling.Evaluating the preoperative resectability of PC is crucial for patient management. MRI seems to reliably detect bulky mesenteric tumors and bladder implants on condition the bladder is filled and appropriate sequences are used.Combined diffusion-weighted and gadolinium-enhanced MRI can accurately predict the peritoneal cancer index preoperatively in patients being considered for cytoreductive surgical procedures.To determine whether abdominal and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with diffusion-weighted and dynamic gadolinium-enhanced imaging can be used to accurately calculate the peritoneal cancer index (PCI) before surgery compared to the PCI tabulated at surgery.Thirty-three patients underwent preoperative MRI followed by cytoreductive surgery for primary tumors of the appendix (n = 25), ovary (n = 5), colon (n = 2), and mesothelioma (n = 1). MRIs were retrospectively reviewed to determine the MRI PCI. These scores were then compared to PCI tabulated at surgery. Patients were categorized as having small-volume tumors (PCI 0–9), moderate-volume tumors (PCI 10–20), and large-volume tumors (PCI > 20). The respective anatomic site scores for both MRI and surgery were compared.There was no significant difference between the MRI PCI and surgical PCI for the 33 patients (P = 0.12). MRI correctly predicted the PCI category in 29 (0.88) of 33 patients. Compared to surgical findings, MRI correctly predicted small-volume tumor in 6 of 7 patients, moderate-volume tumor in 3 of 4 patients, and large-volume tumor in 20 of 22 patients. MRI and surgical PCI scores were identical in 8 patients (24%). A difference of <5 was noted in 16 patients (49%) and of 5–10 in 9 patients (27%). Compared to surgical-site findings, MRI depicted 258 truly positive sites of peritoneal tumor, 35 falsely negative sites, 35 falsely positive sites, and 101 truly negative sites, with a corresponding sensitivity of 0.88, specificity of 0.74, and accuracy of 0.84.Combined diffusion-weighted and gadolinium-enhanced peritoneal MRI accurately predicts the PCI before surgery in patients undergoing evaluation for cytoreductive surgery.Prediction of suboptimal primary cytoreduction in primary ovarian cancer with combined positron emission tomography/computed tomography--a prospective study.To prospectively identify combined PET/CT predictors of incomplete/suboptimal primary cytoreduction in advanced ovarian cancer.From September 2004 to March 2007, 179 patients with a Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) >150 based on serum CA-125, ultrasound examinations and menopausal state, underwent PET/CT within 2 weeks prior to standard surgery/debulking of a pelvic tumor. Ten PET/CT features were identified and evaluated as predictors of cytoreduction in 54 patients with advanced ovarian cancer.Complete cytoreduction (no macroscopic residual disease) was achieved in 35% and optimal cytoreduction (<1 cm residual disease) was achieved in 56%. Using univariate analysis, predictors of incomplete cytoreduction were large bowel mesentery implants (LBMI) (P<0.003), pleural effusion (P<0.009), ascites (P<0.009) and peritoneal carcinosis (P<0.01). LBMI (P<0.03) and ascites (P<0.05) were also predictors of suboptimal cytoreduction. Using multivariate analysis, LBMI was the only independent predictor of incomplete cytoreduction (P=0.004) and no predictor of suboptimal cytoreduction was found.PET/CT predictors of cytoreduction were found. But they should not be used to withhold patients form primary cytoreductive surgery. We suggest PET/CT as a supplementary image modality prior to surgery in primary OC patients whenever accurate and comprehensive preoperative evaluation of primary tumor and metastases is desired.Use of (18)F-FDG PET/CT in the preoperative evaluation of patients diagnosed with peritoneal carcinomatosis of ovarian origin, candidates to cytoreduction and hipec. A pending issue.To evaluate the clinical usefulness of the results obtained with (18)F-FDG PET/CT in relation to CT in the preoperative staging of patients with peritoneal carcinomatosis secondary to primary or recurrent ovarian cancer candidates to cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC).A retrospective study comparing the results obtained with CT and (18)F-FDG PET/CT in the preoperative evaluation of a series of 59 patients was performed. In all patients the peritoneal carcinomatosis index (PCI) was determined by preoperative radiological CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT and compared with surgical PCI, which was considered as reference.Of the 59 patients studied, in 55 peritoneal carcinomatosis presences were confirmed (4 patients had complete responses to neoadjuvant chemotherapy). The mean surgical, CT and 18F-FDG PET/CT PCI was 9.46±7.70, 3.69±3.96 and 2.25±1.02, respectively. In the global disease detection, CT showed a higher positive likelihood ratio (LR+) than (18)F-FDG PET/CT (15.3, 95% CI 8.35-28.04 vs. 3.47, 95% CI 3.36-5.11) and a lower negative likelihood ratio (LR-) than 18F-FDG PET/CT (0.67, 95% CI 0.61-0.73 vs. 0.82, 95% CI 0.76-0.88). In every region of the abdomen the CT showed a greater LR+ than 18F-FDG PET/CT and a lower LR- than 18F-FDG PET/CT.CT showed the best diagnostic results compared to (18)F-FDG PET/CT to confirme the presence of peritoneal disease. The lower performance of the (18)F-FDG PET/CT suggests that the main utility of (18)F-FDG PET/CT is to evaluate a possible metastatic extraperitoneal spread of the disease.Standardized FDG uptake as a prognostic variable and as a predictor of incomplete cytoreduction in primary advanced ovarian cancer.In patients with advanced ovarian cancer undergoing preoperative PET/CT, we investigated the prognostic value of SUV in the primary tumor and we evaluated the value of SUV for predicting incomplete primary cytoreduction (macroscopic residual tumor).From September 2004 to August 2007, 201 consecutive patients with a pelvic tumor and a Risk of Malignancy Index (RMI) > 150 based on serum CA-125, ultrasound examinations and menopausal state, underwent PET/CT within two weeks prior to standard surgery/debulking of a pelvic tumor. At two-year follow-up (August 15, 2009) the association between SUV and overall survival/cytoreductive result were analyzed in 60 ovarian cancer patients (58 stage III and two stage IV).At inclusion median age was 62 years (range 35-85 years); 97% (58/60) had a performance status ≤2; 42% (25/60) underwent complete debulking (no macroscopic residual tumor); median SUV(max) was 13.5 (range 2.5-39.0). Median follow-up was 30.2 months. At follow-up 57% (34/60) were alive and 43% (26/60) had died from ovarian cancer. SUV(max) in patients alive was not statistically different from SUV(max) in dead patients (p=0.69), and SUV(max) was not correlated with the amount of residual tumor after surgery (p=0.19). Using univariate Cox regression analysis, residual tumor was a significant prognostic variable (p=0.001); SUV(max) was not a statistically significant prognostic variable (p=0.86).FDG uptake (SUV(max)) in the primary tumor of patients with advanced ovarian cancer was not a prognostic variable and the FDG uptake did not predict complete cytoreduction after primary surgery. Future prospective clinical trials will need to clarify if other PET tracers can serve as prognostic variables in ovarian cancer.