Prediction of Progressive Mild Cognitive Impairment by Multi-Modal Neuroimaging Biomarkers.For patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), the likelihood of progression to probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) is important not only for individual patient care, but also for the identification of participants in clinical trial, so as to provide early interventions. Biomarkers based on various neuroimaging modalities could offer complementary information regarding different aspects of disease progression. The current study adopted a weighted multi-modality sparse representation-based classification method to combine data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, from three imaging modalities: Volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET), and florbetapir PET. We included 117 normal controls (NC) and 110 MCI patients, 27 of whom progressed to AD within 36 months (pMCI), while the remaining 83 remained stable (sMCI) over the same time period. Modality-specific biomarkers were identified to distinguish MCI from NC and to predict pMCI among MCI. These included the hippocampus, amygdala, middle temporal and inferior temporal regions for MRI, the posterior cingulum, precentral, and postcentral regions for FDG-PET, and the hippocampus, amygdala, and putamen for florbetapir PET. Results indicated that FDG-PET may be a more effective modality in discriminating MCI from NC and in predicting pMCI than florbetapir PET and MRI. Combining modality-specific sensitive biomarkers from the three modalities boosted the discrimination accuracy of MCI from NC (76.7%) and the prediction accuracy of pMCI (82.5%) when compared with the best single-modality results (73.6% for MCI and 75.6% for pMCI with FDG-PET). The relative importance of imaging markers for the prediction of Alzheimer's disease dementia in mild cognitive impairment - Beyond classical regression.Selecting a set of relevant markers to predict conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's disease (AD) has become a challenging task given the wealth of regional pathologic information that can be extracted from multimodal imaging data. Here, we used regularized regression approaches with an elastic net penalty for best subset selection of multiregional information from AV45-PET, FDG-PET and volumetric MRI data to predict conversion from MCI to AD. The study sample consisted of 127 MCI subjects from ADNI-2 who had a clinical follow-up between 6 and 31 months. Additional analyses assessed the effect of partial volume correction on predictive performance of AV45- and FDG-PET data. Predictor variables were highly collinear within and across imaging modalities. Penalized Cox regression yielded more parsimonious prediction models compared to unpenalized Cox regression. Within single modalities, time to conversion was best predicted by increased AV45-PET signal in posterior medial and lateral cortical regions, decreased FDG-PET signal in medial temporal and temporobasal regions, and reduced gray matter volume in medial, basal, and lateral temporal regions. Logistic regression models reached up to 72% cross-validated accuracy for prediction of conversion status, which was comparable to cross-validated accuracy of non-linear support vector machine classification. Regularized regression outperformed unpenalized stepwise regression when number of parameters approached or exceeded the number of training cases. Partial volume correction had a negative effect on the predictive performance of AV45-PET, but slightly improved the predictive value of FDG-PET data. Penalized regression yielded more parsimonious models than unpenalized stepwise regression for the integration of multiregional and multimodal imaging information. The advantage of penalized regression was particularly strong with a high number of collinear predictors. Can Studies of Neuroinflammation in a TSPO Genetic Subgroup (HAB or MAB) Be Applied to the Entire AD Cohort?Neuroinflammation plays a significant role in Alzheimer disease (AD), and translocator protein (TSPO) PET imaging allows us to quantify this process. However, the binding of second-generation TSPO tracers depends on the TSPO genotype coded by the rs6971 single-nucleotide polymorphism, with a 40%-50% increase in BP in high-affinity binders (HABs) compared with mixed-affinity binders (MABs), whereas low-affinity binders (LABs) are unsuitable for evaluation. Hence, several studies are using either HAB alone or HAB and MAB subjects. To translate the findings of neuroinflammation studies to the entire population, it is crucial to establish the influence of TSPO genotypes on AD. Here, we investigated whether different TSPO genotypes influence cognitive function, amyloid load, and disease progression over time.We evaluated 798 subjects (225 control, 388 with mild cognitive impairment [MCI], and 185 with AD) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database at baseline and during follow-up. All subjects were screened for TSPO genotype and underwent detailed clinical and neuropsychologic assessments yearly for 4 y. Of the 798 subjects, 255 also had T1- and T2-weighted MR imaging and amyloid PET with (11)C-Pittsburgh compound B or (18)F-florbetapir.We demonstrated that all TSPO binding groups (HAB, MAB, and LAB) have same level of amyloid load in AD and MCI subjects. We also demonstrated that the prevalence is 50.3% for HAB, 41.2% for MAB, and 8.5% for LAB, without a statistical difference among the AD, MCI, and control groups. During longitudinal follow-up, the mean change in neuropsychometric test scores on the Mini-Mental State Examination, the cognitive and modified Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scales (ADASs), and the Geriatric Depression Scale over time were similar in AD and MCI subjects among the 3 TSPO binding groups. Analysis of the covariates showed that diagnostic group (control, MCI, AD), apolipoprotein E4 status, and sex had a significant effect on decline on the modified Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale (>3 points of the scale), but age and TSPO genotype did not.This study suggests that information obtained from evaluating a subgroup of AD or MCI subject using second-generation TSPO tracers can be translated to the entire AD and MCI population. Thus, we can study fewer AD subjects in evaluating new antineuroinflammatory and antimicroglial agents in intervention studies and in observational studies evaluating the role of neuroinflammation.Nonlinear Association Between Cerebrospinal Fluid and Florbetapir F-18 β-Amyloid Measures Across the Spectrum of Alzheimer Disease.Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and positron emission tomographic (PET) amyloid biomarkers have been proposed for the detection of Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology in living patients and for the tracking of longitudinal changes, but the relation between biomarkers needs further study.To determine the association between CSF and PET amyloid biomarkers (cross-sectional and longitudinal measures) and compare the cutoffs for these measures.Longitudinal clinical cohort study from 2005 to 2014 including 820 participants with at least 1 florbetapir F-18 (hereafter referred to as simply florbetapir)-PET scan and at least 1 CSF β-amyloid 1-42 (Aβ1-42) sample obtained within 30 days of each other (501 participants had a second PET scan after 2 years, including 150 participants with CSF Aβ1-42 measurements). Data were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database.Four different PET scans processing pipelines from 2 different laboratories were compared. The PET cutoff values were established using a mixture-modeling approach, and different mathematical models were applied to define the association between CSF and PET amyloid measures.The values of the CSF Aβ1-42 samples and florbetapir-PET scans showed a nonlinear association (R2 = 0.48-0.66), with the strongest association for values in the middle range. The presence of a larger dynamic range of florbetapir-PET scan values in the higher range compared with the CSF Aβ1-42 plateau explained the differences in correlation with cognition (R2 = 0.36 and R2 = 0.25, respectively). The APOE genotype significantly modified the association between both biomarkers. The PET cutoff values derived from an unsupervised classifier converged with previous PET cutoff values and the established CSF Aβ1-42 cutoff levels. There was no association between longitudinal Aβ1-42 levels and standardized uptake value ratios during follow-up.The association between both biomarkers is limited to a middle range of values, is modified by the APOE genotype, and is absent for longitudinal changes; 4 different approaches in 2 different platforms converge on similar pathological Aβ cutoff levels; and different pipelines to process PET scans showed correlated but not identical results. Our findings suggest that both biomarkers measure different aspects of AD Aβ pathology.Improved power for characterizing longitudinal amyloid-β PET changes and evaluating amyloid-modifying treatments with a cerebral white matter reference region.In this article, we describe an image analysis strategy with improved power for tracking longitudinal amyloid-β (Aβ) PET changes and evaluating Aβ-modifying treatments.Our aims were to compare the power of template-based cerebellar, pontine, and cerebral white matter reference regions to track 24-mo florbetapir standardized uptake value (SUV) ratio (SUVR) changes; to relate those changes to 24-mo clinical declines; and to evaluate Aβ-modifying treatments in Aβ-positive (Aβ+) and Aβ-negative (Aβ-) patients with probable Alzheimer dementia (pAD), in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), in cognitively normal controls (NCs), and in cognitively normal apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) carriers and noncarriers. We used baseline and follow-up (∼24 mo) florbetapir PET scans from 332 Aβ+ and Aβ- subjects participating in the multicenter Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Each of the proposed analyses included 31 pAD patients, 187 MCI patients, and 114 NCs. Cerebral-to-white matter, cerebellar, and pontine SUVRs were characterized in terms of their longitudinal variability; their power to track longitudinal fibrillar Aβ increases in Aβ+ and Aβ- subgroups and cognitively normal APOE4 carriers and noncarriers; the sample sizes needed to detect attenuated accumulation of or clearance of fibrillar Aβ accumulation in randomized clinical trials; and their ability to relate 24-mo fibrillar Aβ increases to clinical declines.As predicted, cerebral-to-white matter SUVR changes were significantly less variable and had significantly greater power to detect 24-mo fibrillar Aβ increases and evaluate Aβ-modifying treatment effects in Aβ+ pAD, MCI, and NC subjects and cognitively normal APOE4 carriers. They were also distinguished by the ability to detect significant associations between 24-mo Aβ increases and clinical declines.A cerebral white matter reference region may improve the power to track longitudinal fibrillar Aβ increases, to characterize their relationship to longitudinal clinical declines, and to evaluate Aβ-modifying treatments in randomized clinical trials.Amyloid imaging and cognitive decline in nondemented oldest-old: the 90+ Study.The goal of this study was to examine cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between cognitive performance and beta amyloid (Aβ) load determined by florbetapir F18 positron emission tomography (PET) in nondemented oldest-old.Thirteen nondemented (normal or cognitively impaired nondemented) participants (median age, 94.2 years) from The 90+ Study underwent florbetapir-PET scanning within 3 months of baseline neuropsychological testing. Amyloid load was measured with a semi-automated quantitative analysis of average cortical-to-cerebellar standardized uptake value ratio (SUVr) and a visual interpretation (Aβ- or Aβ+). Neuropsychological testing was repeated every 6 months.At baseline, SUVr correlated significantly with tests of global cognition and memory. During follow-up (median, 1.5 years), the Aβ+ group had steeper declines on most cognitive tests, particularly global cognitive measures.This preliminary study suggests that greater amyloid load is associated with poorer cognition and faster cognitive decline in nondemented oldest-old. Amyloid load may identify individuals at increased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.Independent information from cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β and florbetapir imaging in Alzheimer's disease.Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β42 and increased retention of florbetapir positron emission tomography are biomarkers reflecting cortical amyloid load in Alzheimer's disease. However, these measurements do not always agree and may represent partly different aspects of the underlying Alzheimer's disease pathology. The goal of this study was therefore to test if cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β biomarkers are independently related to other Alzheimer's disease markers, and to examine individuals who are discordantly classified by these two biomarker modalities. Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β were measured at baseline in 769 persons [161 healthy controls, 68 subjective memory complaints, 419 mild cognitive impairment and 121 Alzheimer's disease dementia, mean age 72 years (standard deviation 7 years), 47% females] and used to predict diagnosis, APOE ε4 carriage status, cerebral blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid total-tau and phosphorylated-tau levels (cross-sectionally); and hippocampal volume, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography results and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale scores (longitudinally). Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β were highly correlated, but adjusting one of these predictors for the other revealed that they both provided partially independent information when predicting diagnosis, APOE ε4, hippocampal volume, metabolism, cognition, total-tau and phosphorylated-tau (the 95% confidence intervals of the adjusted effects did not include zero). Cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β was more strongly related to APOE ε4 whereas positron emission tomography amyloid-β was more strongly related to tau levels (P < 0.05). Discordance (mainly isolated cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β positivity) differed by diagnostic group (P < 0.001) and was seen in 21% of cognitively healthy people but only 6% in dementia patients. The finding that cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β provide partially independent information about a wide range of Alzheimer's measures supports the theory that these modalities represent partly different aspects of Alzheimer's pathology. The fact that mismatch, with positive cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β but normal positron emission tomography amyloid-β, is relatively common in cognitively healthy people may be considered when using these biomarkers to identify early stage Alzheimer's disease. Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β may be more strongly related to early stage Alzheimer's disease, whereas increased positron emission tomography amyloid-β may be more strongly related to disease progression. Suspected non-AD pathology in mild cognitive impairment.We aim to better characterize mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients with suspected non-Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology (SNAP) based on their longitudinal outcome, cognition, biofluid, and neuroimaging profile. MCI participants (n = 361) from ADNI-GO/2 were designated "amyloid positive" with abnormal amyloid-beta 42 levels (AMY+) and "neurodegeneration positive" (NEU+) with abnormal hippocampal volume or hypometabolism using fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography. SNAP was compared with the other MCI groups and with AMY- controls. AMY-NEU+/SNAP, 16.6%, were older than the NEU- groups but not AMY- controls. They had a lower conversion rate to AD after 24 months than AMY+NEU+ MCI participants. SNAP-MCI participants had similar amyloid-beta 42 levels, florbetapir and tau levels, but larger white matter hyperintensity volumes than AMY- controls and AMY-NEU- MCI participants. SNAP participants performed worse on all memory domains and on other cognitive domains, than AMY-NEU- participants but less so than AMY+NEU+ participants. Subthreshold levels of cerebral amyloidosis are unlikely to play a role in SNAP-MCI, but pathologies involving the hippocampus and cerebrovascular disease may underlie the neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment in this group.Brain structure and function as mediators of the effects of amyloid on memory.The objective of this study was to test whether effects of β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology on episodic memory were mediated by metabolism and gray matter volume in the early stages of Alzheimer disease.This was a prospective cohort study. We measured baseline Aβ (using florbetapir-PET), brain function (using fluorodeoxyglucose-PET), and brain structure (using MRI). A mediation analysis was performed to test whether statistical effects of Aβ positivity on cross-sectional and longitudinal episodic memory were mediated by hypometabolism or regional gray matter volume in cognitively healthy controls (CN, n = 280) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI, n = 463).Lower memory scores were associated with Aβ positivity (CN, mildly; MCI, strongly), smaller gray matter volumes (CN, few regions, including hippocampus; MCI, widespread), and hypometabolism. Smaller volumes and hypometabolism mediated effects of Aβ in MCI but not in CN. The strongest individual regions mediated up to approximately 25%. A combination of brain structure and function mediated up to approximately 40%. In several regions, gray matter atrophy and hypometabolism predicted episodic memory without being associated (at p < 0.05) with Aβ positivity.Changes in brain structure and function appear to be, in part, downstream events from Aβ pathology, ultimately resulting in episodic memory deficits. However, Aβ pathology is also strongly related to memory deficits through mechanisms that are not quantified by these imaging measurements, and episodic memory decline is partly caused by Alzheimer disease-like brain changes independently of Aβ pathology.Amyloid negativity in patients with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease and MCI.To examine the clinical and biomarker characteristics of patients with amyloid-negative Alzheimer disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), a prospective cohort study.We first investigated the reliability of florbetapir- PET in patients with AD and patients with MCI using CSF-Aβ1-42 as a comparison amyloid measurement. We then compared florbetapir- vs florbetapir+ patients with respect to several AD-specific biomarkers, baseline and longitudinal cognitive measurements, and demographic and clinician report data.Florbetapir and CSF-Aβ1-42 +/- status agreed for 98% of ADs (89% of MCIs), indicating that most florbetapir- scans were a reliable representation of amyloid status. Florbetapir- AD (n = 27/177; 15%) and MCI (n = 74/217, 34%) were more likely to be APOE4-negative (MCI 83%, AD 96%) than their florbetapir+ counterparts (MCI 30%, AD 24%). Florbetapir- patients also had less AD-specific hypometabolism, lower CSF p-tau and t-tau, and better longitudinal cognitive performance, and were more likely to be taking medication for depression. In MCI only, florbetapir- participants had less hippocampal atrophy and hypometabolism and lower functional activity questionnaire scores compared to florbetapir+ participants.Overall, image analysis problems do not appear to be a primary explanation of amyloid negativity. Florbetapir- ADNI patients have a variety of clinical and biomarker features that differ from their florbetapir+ counterparts, suggesting that one or more non-AD etiologies (which may include vascular disease and depression) account for their AD-like phenotype.Improved longitudinal [(18)F]-AV45 amyloid PET by white matter reference and VOI-based partial volume effect correction.Amyloid positron-emission-tomography (PET) offers an important research and diagnostic tool for investigating Alzheimer's disease (AD). The majority of amyloid PET studies have used the cerebellum as a reference region, and clinical studies have not accounted for atrophy-based partial volume effects (PVE). Longitudinal studies using cerebellum as reference tissue have revealed only small mean increases and high inter-subject variability in amyloid binding. We aimed to test the effects of different reference regions and PVE-correction (PVEC) on the discriminatory power and longitudinal performance of amyloid PET. We analyzed [(18)F]-AV45 PET and T1-weighted MRI data of 962 subjects at baseline and two-year follow-up data of 258 subjects. Cortical composite volume-of-interest (VOI) values (COMP) for tracer uptake were generated using either full brain atlas VOIs, gray matter segmented VOIs or gray matter segmented VOIs after VOI-based PVEC. Standard-uptake-value ratios (SUVR) were calculated by scaling the COMP values to uptake in cerebellum (SUVRCBL), brainstem (SUVRBST) or white matter (SUVRWM). Mean SUV, SUVR, and changes after PVEC were compared at baseline between diagnostic groups of healthy controls (HC; N=316), mild cognitive impairment (MCI; N=483) and AD (N=163). Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) were calculated for the discriminations between HC, MCI and AD, and expressed as area under the curve (AUC). Finally, the longitudinal [(18)F]-AV45-PET data were used to analyze the impact of quantitation procedures on apparent changes in amyloid load over time. Reference region SUV was most constant between diagnosis groups for the white matter. PVEC led to decreases of COMP-SUV in HC (-18%) and MCI (-10%), but increases in AD (+7%). Highest AUCs were found when using PVEC with white matter scaling for the contrast between HC/AD (0.907) or with brainstem scaling for the contrast between HC/MCI (0.658). Longitudinal increases were greatest in all diagnosis groups with application of PVEC, and inter-subject variability was lowest for the white matter reference. Thus, discriminatory power of [(18)F]-AV45-PET was improved by use of a VOI-based PVEC and white matter or brainstem rather than cerebellum reference region. Detection of longitudinal amyloid increases was optimized with PVEC and white matter reference tissue. Prediction of Progressive Mild Cognitive Impairment by Multi-Modal Neuroimaging Biomarkers.For patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), the likelihood of progression to probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) is important not only for individual patient care, but also for the identification of participants in clinical trial, so as to provide early interventions. Biomarkers based on various neuroimaging modalities could offer complementary information regarding different aspects of disease progression. The current study adopted a weighted multi-modality sparse representation-based classification method to combine data from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database, from three imaging modalities: Volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET), and florbetapir PET. We included 117 normal controls (NC) and 110 MCI patients, 27 of whom progressed to AD within 36 months (pMCI), while the remaining 83 remained stable (sMCI) over the same time period. Modality-specific biomarkers were identified to distinguish MCI from NC and to predict pMCI among MCI. These included the hippocampus, amygdala, middle temporal and inferior temporal regions for MRI, the posterior cingulum, precentral, and postcentral regions for FDG-PET, and the hippocampus, amygdala, and putamen for florbetapir PET. Results indicated that FDG-PET may be a more effective modality in discriminating MCI from NC and in predicting pMCI than florbetapir PET and MRI. Combining modality-specific sensitive biomarkers from the three modalities boosted the discrimination accuracy of MCI from NC (76.7%) and the prediction accuracy of pMCI (82.5%) when compared with the best single-modality results (73.6% for MCI and 75.6% for pMCI with FDG-PET). The relative importance of imaging markers for the prediction of Alzheimer's disease dementia in mild cognitive impairment - Beyond classical regression.Selecting a set of relevant markers to predict conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to Alzheimer's disease (AD) has become a challenging task given the wealth of regional pathologic information that can be extracted from multimodal imaging data. Here, we used regularized regression approaches with an elastic net penalty for best subset selection of multiregional information from AV45-PET, FDG-PET and volumetric MRI data to predict conversion from MCI to AD. The study sample consisted of 127 MCI subjects from ADNI-2 who had a clinical follow-up between 6 and 31 months. Additional analyses assessed the effect of partial volume correction on predictive performance of AV45- and FDG-PET data. Predictor variables were highly collinear within and across imaging modalities. Penalized Cox regression yielded more parsimonious prediction models compared to unpenalized Cox regression. Within single modalities, time to conversion was best predicted by increased AV45-PET signal in posterior medial and lateral cortical regions, decreased FDG-PET signal in medial temporal and temporobasal regions, and reduced gray matter volume in medial, basal, and lateral temporal regions. Logistic regression models reached up to 72% cross-validated accuracy for prediction of conversion status, which was comparable to cross-validated accuracy of non-linear support vector machine classification. Regularized regression outperformed unpenalized stepwise regression when number of parameters approached or exceeded the number of training cases. Partial volume correction had a negative effect on the predictive performance of AV45-PET, but slightly improved the predictive value of FDG-PET data. Penalized regression yielded more parsimonious models than unpenalized stepwise regression for the integration of multiregional and multimodal imaging information. The advantage of penalized regression was particularly strong with a high number of collinear predictors. Can Studies of Neuroinflammation in a TSPO Genetic Subgroup (HAB or MAB) Be Applied to the Entire AD Cohort?Neuroinflammation plays a significant role in Alzheimer disease (AD), and translocator protein (TSPO) PET imaging allows us to quantify this process. However, the binding of second-generation TSPO tracers depends on the TSPO genotype coded by the rs6971 single-nucleotide polymorphism, with a 40%-50% increase in BP in high-affinity binders (HABs) compared with mixed-affinity binders (MABs), whereas low-affinity binders (LABs) are unsuitable for evaluation. Hence, several studies are using either HAB alone or HAB and MAB subjects. To translate the findings of neuroinflammation studies to the entire population, it is crucial to establish the influence of TSPO genotypes on AD. Here, we investigated whether different TSPO genotypes influence cognitive function, amyloid load, and disease progression over time.We evaluated 798 subjects (225 control, 388 with mild cognitive impairment [MCI], and 185 with AD) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database at baseline and during follow-up. All subjects were screened for TSPO genotype and underwent detailed clinical and neuropsychologic assessments yearly for 4 y. Of the 798 subjects, 255 also had T1- and T2-weighted MR imaging and amyloid PET with (11)C-Pittsburgh compound B or (18)F-florbetapir.We demonstrated that all TSPO binding groups (HAB, MAB, and LAB) have same level of amyloid load in AD and MCI subjects. We also demonstrated that the prevalence is 50.3% for HAB, 41.2% for MAB, and 8.5% for LAB, without a statistical difference among the AD, MCI, and control groups. During longitudinal follow-up, the mean change in neuropsychometric test scores on the Mini-Mental State Examination, the cognitive and modified Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scales (ADASs), and the Geriatric Depression Scale over time were similar in AD and MCI subjects among the 3 TSPO binding groups. Analysis of the covariates showed that diagnostic group (control, MCI, AD), apolipoprotein E4 status, and sex had a significant effect on decline on the modified Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale (>3 points of the scale), but age and TSPO genotype did not.This study suggests that information obtained from evaluating a subgroup of AD or MCI subject using second-generation TSPO tracers can be translated to the entire AD and MCI population. Thus, we can study fewer AD subjects in evaluating new antineuroinflammatory and antimicroglial agents in intervention studies and in observational studies evaluating the role of neuroinflammation.Nonlinear Association Between Cerebrospinal Fluid and Florbetapir F-18 β-Amyloid Measures Across the Spectrum of Alzheimer Disease.Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and positron emission tomographic (PET) amyloid biomarkers have been proposed for the detection of Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology in living patients and for the tracking of longitudinal changes, but the relation between biomarkers needs further study.To determine the association between CSF and PET amyloid biomarkers (cross-sectional and longitudinal measures) and compare the cutoffs for these measures.Longitudinal clinical cohort study from 2005 to 2014 including 820 participants with at least 1 florbetapir F-18 (hereafter referred to as simply florbetapir)-PET scan and at least 1 CSF β-amyloid 1-42 (Aβ1-42) sample obtained within 30 days of each other (501 participants had a second PET scan after 2 years, including 150 participants with CSF Aβ1-42 measurements). Data were obtained from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative database.Four different PET scans processing pipelines from 2 different laboratories were compared. The PET cutoff values were established using a mixture-modeling approach, and different mathematical models were applied to define the association between CSF and PET amyloid measures.The values of the CSF Aβ1-42 samples and florbetapir-PET scans showed a nonlinear association (R2 = 0.48-0.66), with the strongest association for values in the middle range. The presence of a larger dynamic range of florbetapir-PET scan values in the higher range compared with the CSF Aβ1-42 plateau explained the differences in correlation with cognition (R2 = 0.36 and R2 = 0.25, respectively). The APOE genotype significantly modified the association between both biomarkers. The PET cutoff values derived from an unsupervised classifier converged with previous PET cutoff values and the established CSF Aβ1-42 cutoff levels. There was no association between longitudinal Aβ1-42 levels and standardized uptake value ratios during follow-up.The association between both biomarkers is limited to a middle range of values, is modified by the APOE genotype, and is absent for longitudinal changes; 4 different approaches in 2 different platforms converge on similar pathological Aβ cutoff levels; and different pipelines to process PET scans showed correlated but not identical results. Our findings suggest that both biomarkers measure different aspects of AD Aβ pathology.Improved power for characterizing longitudinal amyloid-β PET changes and evaluating amyloid-modifying treatments with a cerebral white matter reference region.In this article, we describe an image analysis strategy with improved power for tracking longitudinal amyloid-β (Aβ) PET changes and evaluating Aβ-modifying treatments.Our aims were to compare the power of template-based cerebellar, pontine, and cerebral white matter reference regions to track 24-mo florbetapir standardized uptake value (SUV) ratio (SUVR) changes; to relate those changes to 24-mo clinical declines; and to evaluate Aβ-modifying treatments in Aβ-positive (Aβ+) and Aβ-negative (Aβ-) patients with probable Alzheimer dementia (pAD), in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), in cognitively normal controls (NCs), and in cognitively normal apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) carriers and noncarriers. We used baseline and follow-up (∼24 mo) florbetapir PET scans from 332 Aβ+ and Aβ- subjects participating in the multicenter Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. Each of the proposed analyses included 31 pAD patients, 187 MCI patients, and 114 NCs. Cerebral-to-white matter, cerebellar, and pontine SUVRs were characterized in terms of their longitudinal variability; their power to track longitudinal fibrillar Aβ increases in Aβ+ and Aβ- subgroups and cognitively normal APOE4 carriers and noncarriers; the sample sizes needed to detect attenuated accumulation of or clearance of fibrillar Aβ accumulation in randomized clinical trials; and their ability to relate 24-mo fibrillar Aβ increases to clinical declines.As predicted, cerebral-to-white matter SUVR changes were significantly less variable and had significantly greater power to detect 24-mo fibrillar Aβ increases and evaluate Aβ-modifying treatment effects in Aβ+ pAD, MCI, and NC subjects and cognitively normal APOE4 carriers. They were also distinguished by the ability to detect significant associations between 24-mo Aβ increases and clinical declines.A cerebral white matter reference region may improve the power to track longitudinal fibrillar Aβ increases, to characterize their relationship to longitudinal clinical declines, and to evaluate Aβ-modifying treatments in randomized clinical trials.Amyloid imaging and cognitive decline in nondemented oldest-old: the 90+ Study.The goal of this study was to examine cross-sectional and longitudinal associations between cognitive performance and beta amyloid (Aβ) load determined by florbetapir F18 positron emission tomography (PET) in nondemented oldest-old.Thirteen nondemented (normal or cognitively impaired nondemented) participants (median age, 94.2 years) from The 90+ Study underwent florbetapir-PET scanning within 3 months of baseline neuropsychological testing. Amyloid load was measured with a semi-automated quantitative analysis of average cortical-to-cerebellar standardized uptake value ratio (SUVr) and a visual interpretation (Aβ- or Aβ+). Neuropsychological testing was repeated every 6 months.At baseline, SUVr correlated significantly with tests of global cognition and memory. During follow-up (median, 1.5 years), the Aβ+ group had steeper declines on most cognitive tests, particularly global cognitive measures.This preliminary study suggests that greater amyloid load is associated with poorer cognition and faster cognitive decline in nondemented oldest-old. Amyloid load may identify individuals at increased risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.Independent information from cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β and florbetapir imaging in Alzheimer's disease.Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β42 and increased retention of florbetapir positron emission tomography are biomarkers reflecting cortical amyloid load in Alzheimer's disease. However, these measurements do not always agree and may represent partly different aspects of the underlying Alzheimer's disease pathology. The goal of this study was therefore to test if cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β biomarkers are independently related to other Alzheimer's disease markers, and to examine individuals who are discordantly classified by these two biomarker modalities. Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β were measured at baseline in 769 persons [161 healthy controls, 68 subjective memory complaints, 419 mild cognitive impairment and 121 Alzheimer's disease dementia, mean age 72 years (standard deviation 7 years), 47% females] and used to predict diagnosis, APOE ε4 carriage status, cerebral blood flow, cerebrospinal fluid total-tau and phosphorylated-tau levels (cross-sectionally); and hippocampal volume, fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography results and Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale scores (longitudinally). Cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β were highly correlated, but adjusting one of these predictors for the other revealed that they both provided partially independent information when predicting diagnosis, APOE ε4, hippocampal volume, metabolism, cognition, total-tau and phosphorylated-tau (the 95% confidence intervals of the adjusted effects did not include zero). Cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β was more strongly related to APOE ε4 whereas positron emission tomography amyloid-β was more strongly related to tau levels (P < 0.05). Discordance (mainly isolated cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β positivity) differed by diagnostic group (P < 0.001) and was seen in 21% of cognitively healthy people but only 6% in dementia patients. The finding that cerebrospinal fluid and positron emission tomography amyloid-β provide partially independent information about a wide range of Alzheimer's measures supports the theory that these modalities represent partly different aspects of Alzheimer's pathology. The fact that mismatch, with positive cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β but normal positron emission tomography amyloid-β, is relatively common in cognitively healthy people may be considered when using these biomarkers to identify early stage Alzheimer's disease. Reduced cerebrospinal fluid amyloid-β may be more strongly related to early stage Alzheimer's disease, whereas increased positron emission tomography amyloid-β may be more strongly related to disease progression. Suspected non-AD pathology in mild cognitive impairment.We aim to better characterize mild cognitive impairment (MCI) patients with suspected non-Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology (SNAP) based on their longitudinal outcome, cognition, biofluid, and neuroimaging profile. MCI participants (n = 361) from ADNI-GO/2 were designated "amyloid positive" with abnormal amyloid-beta 42 levels (AMY+) and "neurodegeneration positive" (NEU+) with abnormal hippocampal volume or hypometabolism using fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography. SNAP was compared with the other MCI groups and with AMY- controls. AMY-NEU+/SNAP, 16.6%, were older than the NEU- groups but not AMY- controls. They had a lower conversion rate to AD after 24 months than AMY+NEU+ MCI participants. SNAP-MCI participants had similar amyloid-beta 42 levels, florbetapir and tau levels, but larger white matter hyperintensity volumes than AMY- controls and AMY-NEU- MCI participants. SNAP participants performed worse on all memory domains and on other cognitive domains, than AMY-NEU- participants but less so than AMY+NEU+ participants. Subthreshold levels of cerebral amyloidosis are unlikely to play a role in SNAP-MCI, but pathologies involving the hippocampus and cerebrovascular disease may underlie the neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment in this group.Brain structure and function as mediators of the effects of amyloid on memory.The objective of this study was to test whether effects of β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology on episodic memory were mediated by metabolism and gray matter volume in the early stages of Alzheimer disease.This was a prospective cohort study. We measured baseline Aβ (using florbetapir-PET), brain function (using fluorodeoxyglucose-PET), and brain structure (using MRI). A mediation analysis was performed to test whether statistical effects of Aβ positivity on cross-sectional and longitudinal episodic memory were mediated by hypometabolism or regional gray matter volume in cognitively healthy controls (CN, n = 280) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI, n = 463).Lower memory scores were associated with Aβ positivity (CN, mildly; MCI, strongly), smaller gray matter volumes (CN, few regions, including hippocampus; MCI, widespread), and hypometabolism. Smaller volumes and hypometabolism mediated effects of Aβ in MCI but not in CN. The strongest individual regions mediated up to approximately 25%. A combination of brain structure and function mediated up to approximately 40%. In several regions, gray matter atrophy and hypometabolism predicted episodic memory without being associated (at p < 0.05) with Aβ positivity.Changes in brain structure and function appear to be, in part, downstream events from Aβ pathology, ultimately resulting in episodic memory deficits. However, Aβ pathology is also strongly related to memory deficits through mechanisms that are not quantified by these imaging measurements, and episodic memory decline is partly caused by Alzheimer disease-like brain changes independently of Aβ pathology.Amyloid negativity in patients with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease and MCI.To examine the clinical and biomarker characteristics of patients with amyloid-negative Alzheimer disease (AD) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), a prospective cohort study.We first investigated the reliability of florbetapir- PET in patients with AD and patients with MCI using CSF-Aβ1-42 as a comparison amyloid measurement. We then compared florbetapir- vs florbetapir+ patients with respect to several AD-specific biomarkers, baseline and longitudinal cognitive measurements, and demographic and clinician report data.Florbetapir and CSF-Aβ1-42 +/- status agreed for 98% of ADs (89% of MCIs), indicating that most florbetapir- scans were a reliable representation of amyloid status. Florbetapir- AD (n = 27/177; 15%) and MCI (n = 74/217, 34%) were more likely to be APOE4-negative (MCI 83%, AD 96%) than their florbetapir+ counterparts (MCI 30%, AD 24%). Florbetapir- patients also had less AD-specific hypometabolism, lower CSF p-tau and t-tau, and better longitudinal cognitive performance, and were more likely to be taking medication for depression. In MCI only, florbetapir- participants had less hippocampal atrophy and hypometabolism and lower functional activity questionnaire scores compared to florbetapir+ participants.Overall, image analysis problems do not appear to be a primary explanation of amyloid negativity. Florbetapir- ADNI patients have a variety of clinical and biomarker features that differ from their florbetapir+ counterparts, suggesting that one or more non-AD etiologies (which may include vascular disease and depression) account for their AD-like phenotype.Improved longitudinal [(18)F]-AV45 amyloid PET by white matter reference and VOI-based partial volume effect correction.Amyloid positron-emission-tomography (PET) offers an important research and diagnostic tool for investigating Alzheimer's disease (AD). The majority of amyloid PET studies have used the cerebellum as a reference region, and clinical studies have not accounted for atrophy-based partial volume effects (PVE). Longitudinal studies using cerebellum as reference tissue have revealed only small mean increases and high inter-subject variability in amyloid binding. We aimed to test the effects of different reference regions and PVE-correction (PVEC) on the discriminatory power and longitudinal performance of amyloid PET. We analyzed [(18)F]-AV45 PET and T1-weighted MRI data of 962 subjects at baseline and two-year follow-up data of 258 subjects. Cortical composite volume-of-interest (VOI) values (COMP) for tracer uptake were generated using either full brain atlas VOIs, gray matter segmented VOIs or gray matter segmented VOIs after VOI-based PVEC. Standard-uptake-value ratios (SUVR) were calculated by scaling the COMP values to uptake in cerebellum (SUVRCBL), brainstem (SUVRBST) or white matter (SUVRWM). Mean SUV, SUVR, and changes after PVEC were compared at baseline between diagnostic groups of healthy controls (HC; N=316), mild cognitive impairment (MCI; N=483) and AD (N=163). Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) were calculated for the discriminations between HC, MCI and AD, and expressed as area under the curve (AUC). Finally, the longitudinal [(18)F]-AV45-PET data were used to analyze the impact of quantitation procedures on apparent changes in amyloid load over time. Reference region SUV was most constant between diagnosis groups for the white matter. PVEC led to decreases of COMP-SUV in HC (-18%) and MCI (-10%), but increases in AD (+7%). Highest AUCs were found when using PVEC with white matter scaling for the contrast between HC/AD (0.907) or with brainstem scaling for the contrast between HC/MCI (0.658). Longitudinal increases were greatest in all diagnosis groups with application of PVEC, and inter-subject variability was lowest for the white matter reference. Thus, discriminatory power of [(18)F]-AV45-PET was improved by use of a VOI-based PVEC and white matter or brainstem rather than cerebellum reference region. Detection of longitudinal amyloid increases was optimized with PVEC and white matter reference tissue.