[Treatment of patients with neuromuscular disease in a warm climate].Several patient groups request treatment in a warm climate, in spite of the fact that the effects of such treatment are undocumented.47 children and 40 adults with neuromuscular diseases were recruited, stratified according to sex, use or non-use of electric wheelchair, primary myopathy or hereditary neuropathy, and randomised into two adult and two children groups. The patients were treated in a rehabilitation centre, either on Lanzarote or in Norway. All patients were monitored with physical tests and questionnaires at the start of the study, at the end of the treatment period, after three months (all groups) and after six months (adults only).No significant differences in effect between the groups were found. In the warm climate, the adult patient group showed a statistically significant improvement regarding pain, quality of life, depression, and results of physical tests at the end of treatment. After three months, the improvement in physical tests was still present. Among adult patients treated in Norway, improvement in physical tests was statistically significant after three months, but not at the end of the treatment period.This study did not show a statistically significant difference between patients with various neuromuscular diseases treated in a warm climate compared to similar patients treated in Norway.The effects of strength training in patients with selected neuromuscular disorders.Five subjects with spinal muscular atrophy, limb-girdle or facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, were studied. Measurements pre- and post-training included: maximum isometric, dynamic and isokinetic strength, in single-arm curl and double-leg press exercises; contractile properties of the elbow flexors; computerized tomography of the upper arms and thighs; muscle biopsies from the biceps brachii muscle of each arm in three subjects. Dynamic weight training was performed 3 times per week for 9 wk; exercises comprised unilateral arm curls (the contralateral arm acted as a control), and bilateral leg press. Strength increases in the trained arm were between 19 and 34%, and from -14 to +25% in the control arm; leg strength increased from 11 to 50%. Moreover, the pretraining maximum load could be lifted from 3 to 48 times in the trained limbs, and from 1 to 13 times in an untrained limb before fatigue. Contractile properties of the elbow flexors were unchanged with training, but pre-intervention, three subjects demonstrated incomplete motor unit activation. Most of the gains in strength were apparently due to a neural adaptation, rather than muscle hypertrophy. The tomograms and biopsy samples were inadequate to determine muscle, or muscle fiber areas with confidence; they did indicate however, no additional overt muscle structural damage. Strength training may be a potentially useful therapeutic option in the management of selected neuromuscular disorders.Aquatic therapy for a child with type III spinal muscular atrophy: a case report.Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is a neuromuscular disorder characterized by degeneration of alpha motor neurons. This case report describes an aquatic therapy program and the outcomes for a 3-year-old girl with type III SMA. Motor skills were examined using the 88-item Gross Motor Function Measure (GMFM), the Peabody Developmental Motor Scales (PDMS-2), and the GAITRite system. The child received aquatic therapy twice per week for 45-min sessions, for 14 weeks. The intervention included aquatic activities designed to improve gross motor skills and age-appropriate functional mobility. The GMFM total score improved by 11% following the intervention. The Standing Dimension score improved by 28% and the Walking, Running, and Jumping Dimension score improved by 18%. The gross motor quotient for the PDMS-2 improved from 66 to 74. The child's gait showed improvement in walking velocity, stride length, and single-limb support time as a percentage of the gait cycle. The outcomes of this case report demonstrate the successful improvement of gross motor function and gait in a 3-year-old child with SMA. This study provides clinical information for therapists utilizing aquatic therapy as a modality for children with neuromuscular disorders.Training improves oxidative capacity, but not function, in spinal muscular atrophy type III.In this study we investigated the effect of 12 weeks of cycle ergometer training in patients with spinal muscular atrophy type III (SMA III), a hereditary motor neuron disease with progressive muscle weakness and atrophy.Six SMA III patients and 9 healthy subjects completed a 12-week training program, performing 42 30-minute sessions exercising at 65-70% of maximal oxygen uptake (VO2max ). VO2max , muscle strength, functional tests, and self-reported activities of daily living were assessed before and after the training.Training induced a 27 ± 3% increase in VO2max (17 ± 2 to 21 ± 2 ml/kg/min, P < 0.001) in patients. However, fatigue was a major complaint and caused 1 patient to drop out, increased the need for sleep in 3 patients, and led to training modifications in 2 patients.Cycle exercise improves VO2max in SMA III without causing muscle damage, but it also induces significant fatigue. This warrants study into alternative training methods to improve exercise capacity in SMA III patients.Whole-body vibration training in children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and spinal muscular atrophy.Whole-body-vibration training is used to improve muscle strength and function and might therefore constitute a potential supportive therapy for neuromuscular diseases.To evaluate safety of whole-body vibration training in ambulatory children with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA).14 children with DMD and 8 with SMA underwent an 8-week vibration training programme on a Galileo MedM at home (3 × 3 min twice a day, 5 days a week). Primary outcome was safety of the training, assessed clinically and by measuring serum creatine kinase levels. Secondary outcome was efficacy as measured by changes in time function tests, muscle strength and angular degree of dorsiflexion of the ankles.All children showed good clinical tolerance. In boys with DMD, creatine kinase increased by 56% after the first day of training and returned to baseline after 8 weeks of continuous whole-body vibration training. No changes in laboratory parameters were observed in children with SMA. Secondary outcomes showed mild, but not significant, improvements with the exception of the distance walked in the 6-min walking test in children with SMA, which rose from 371.3 m to 402.8 m (p < 0.01).Whole-body vibration training is clinically well tolerated in children with DMD and SMA. The relevance of the temporary increase in creatine kinase in DMD during the first days of training is unclear, but it is not related to clinical symptoms or deterioration.Spinal muscular atrophy type II (intermediary) and III (Kugelberg-Welander). Evolution of 50 patients with physiotherapy and hydrotherapy in a swimming pool.We added hydrotherapy to 50 patients with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) who were being treated with individual conventional physiotherapy. Hydrotherapy performed at an approximate temperature of 30 degrees Celsius, twice a week, for thirty minutes in children and forty-five minutes in adults during a 2-year period. The outcome derived from this combined modality of treatment was rated according to physiotherapeutic evaluations, the MMT (Manual Muscular Test), and the Barthel Ladder. Patients were reevaluated at 2-month intervals. After two years of ongoing treatment, we were able to observe that the deformities in hip, knee and foot were progressive in all SMA Type II patients, and in some Type III. Muscle strength stabilized in most SMA Type III patients, and improved in some. MMT was not done in SMA Type II. In all patients we were able to detect an improvement in the Barthel Ladder scale. This study suggests that a measurable improvement in the quality of daily living may be obtained in patients with SMA Types II and III subjected to conventional physiotherapy when associated with hydrotherapy.Resistance strength training exercise in children with spinal muscular atrophy.Preliminary evidence in adults with spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) and in SMA animal models suggests exercise has potential benefits in improving or stabilizing muscle strength and motor function.We evaluated feasibility, safety, and effects on strength and motor function of a home-based, supervised progressive resistance strength training exercise program in children with SMA types II and III. Up to 14 bilateral proximal muscles were exercised 3 times weekly for 12 weeks.Nine children with SMA, aged 10.4 ± 3.8 years, completed the resistance training exercise program. Ninety percent of visits occurred per protocol. Training sessions were pain-free (99.8%), and no study-related adverse events occurred. Trends in improved strength and motor function were observed.A 12-week supervised, home-based, 3-day/week progressive resistance training exercise program is feasible, safe, and well tolerated in children with SMA. These findings can inform future studies of exercise in SMA.