Value of 3-dimensional sonohysterography in infertility work-up.To compare the diagnostic value of 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) sonohysterography (SHG) and outpatient hysteroscopy (OH) in detecting intrauterine lesions in infertile women.Comparative, observational, cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force Classification II-2).University hospital.One hundred eighty women with a normal uterine cavity at transvaginal ultrasound and hysterosalpingography (HSG) underwent infertility workup at our outpatient clinic.All patients underwent 2D-SHG, 3D-SHG, and OH.Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy of 2D-SHG and 3D-SHG were compared with OH in detecting intrauterine lesions. For 2D-SHG, sensitivity was 0.70 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.49-0.85), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.96-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.79-1.0), NPV was 0.95 (95% CI, 0.9-0.97), and accuracy was 95.5%. For 3D-SHG, sensitivity was 0.92 (95% CI, 0.74-0.98), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.97-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (05% CI, 0.83-1.0), NPV was 0.98 (95% CI, 0.95-0.99), and accuracy was 98.8%. For OH, sensitivity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.85-1.0), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.97-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.84-1.0), NPV was 1.0 (0.97-1.0), and accuracy was 100%. Thus, 3D-SHG is comparable to OH in diagnosing intrauterine lesions (p = .23), and both are superior to 2D-SHG (p <0.001).The diagnostic value of 3D-SHG is comparable to OH in detecting intrauterine lesions, and both are superior to 2 D-SHG. 3D-SHG should be included in the infertility workup even in women with a normal uterine cavity at transvaginal ultrasound or hysterosalpingography.3D sonohysterography vs hysteroscopy: a cross-sectional study for the evaluation of endouterine diseases.To assess the concordance between the presumed diagnosis obtained with the 3D sonohysterography (SHG) and with the diagnostic hysteroscopy (HYS); to determine whether the 3D SHG has the accuracy needed to be considered as a diagnostic screening standard in cases of suspected endouterine pathology.We selected 224 patients who voluntarily decided to undergo 3D SHG from a population with suspected presence of endouterine disease at TVS. The patients underwent first 3D SHG and then diagnostic HYS. We recorded each patient's discomfort/pain during the two techniques. We used the "Bayes Theorem" to calculate the sensitivity and specificity of the 3D SHG as compared to HYS.Overall the 3D SHG diagnosis was confirmed in 156/224 cases (69.64 %). Concordance for endometrial thickening was 0 %; for Asherman's syndrome was 50.00 %; for polyp was 77.78 %; and for myoma, mucus accumulation and Müllerian anomalies (arcuate uterus, septate and subseptate uterus) was 100.00 %. Furthermore, 3D SHG was better tolerated than HYS.Despite the diagnostic accuracy and mini-invasiveness of 3D SHG, we suggest that it cannot be a substitute of HYS in endouterine disease diagnosis, but it could be considered as a good method of screening to address patients to hysteroscopic confirmation.Value of 3-dimensional sonohysterography for detection of intrauterine lesions in women with abnormal uterine bleeding.To compare 2-dimensional (2D) sonohysterography (SHG) and 3D-SHG with saline solution infusion vs diagnostic hysteroscopy for investigation of intrauterine lesions in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding.Comparative observational cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force classification II-1).University hospital.Fifty perimenopausal and 20 postmenopausal women with abnormal intrauterine bleeding with clinically or ultrasonically suspected intrauterine lesions.Conventional 2D- and 3D ultrasonography and 2D- and 3D-SHG with saline solution infusion followed by diagnostic hysteroscopy, and endometrial curettage or subsequent operative treatment (e.g., hysterectomy, myomectomy, or polypectomy). Ultrasonographic and hysteroscopic findings were compared with histopathologic findings.For 2D-SHG, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, overall accuracy, likelihood ratio for a positive result, and likelihood ratio for a negative result were 79%, 72%, 89%, 54%, 76%, 2.82, and 0.29, respectively, and for 3D-SHG, were 92%, 89%, 96%, 80%, 91%, 8.36, and 0.09, respectively; and for diagnostic hysteroscopy, were 94%, 89%, 96%, 84%, 93%, 8.55, and 0.07, respectively. Thus, 3D-SHG was superior to 2D SHG (p = .02) and comparable to diagnostic hysteroscopy (p = .75) for diagnosis of intrauterine lesions.3D-SHG can be used in the initial investigation of intrauterine lesions in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding before resorting to invasive procedures such as diagnostic hysteroscopy. Further studies of computer-reconstructed 3D-SHG virtual hysteroscopy are recommended.Saline infusion sonohysterography versus hysteroscopy for uterine cavity evaluation.The most frequent procedures performed on women with abnormal uterine bleeding are 2D and 3D ultrasound. The most common accepted approach for the management of abnormal uterine bleeding is 2D TV scan followed by therapeutic hysteroscopy. The purpose of this prospective study was to assess whether 3D saline infusion sonohysterography (3D SIS) could replace diagnostic hysteroscopy (DH) for the diagnosis of endometrial pathology, in patients with abnormal uterine bleeding.A prospective study in the ultrasound department of the Women's Specialized Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia from January 2008 to February 2010.0One hundred and one patients with abnormal uterine bleeding, suspected to have endometrial abnormality by 2D and 3D transvaginal scan, were prospectively studied. Of these, 55 patients had undergone both 3D SIS and DH, followed by verification of results with histopathology.Upon comparison of 3D SIS and DH individually with histopathology, specificity and sensitivity for 3D SIS were 67% and 100%, respectively, and for hysteroscopy 67% and 98%, respectively. In addition, the positive predictive value and negative predictive value were 98% and 100%, respectively, for 3D SIS, while for DH they were 98% and 67%, respectively.3D SIS is a safe alternative to hysteroscopy. However, larger randomized controlled trials should be conducted to ascertain the validity and reliability of this advantageous, less-invasive procedure, for women with abnormal uterine bleeding, who require evaluation of the endometrial cavity.The diagnostic accuracy of two- vs three-dimensional sonohysterography for evaluation of the uterine cavity in the reproductive age.To compare 2-dimensional sonohysterography (2D SHG) vs 3-dimensional sonohysterography (3D SHG) using saline solution infusion, with outpatient hysteroscopy as the gold standard, for evaluation of the uterine cavity in women of reproductive age.Comparative observational cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force classification II-2).University hospital.One hundred twenty women of reproductive age with abnormal uterine bleeding, infertility, or recurrent pregnancy loss and with clinically and/or ultrasongraphically suspected intrauterine lesions.All patients underwent 2D SHG and 3D SHG using saline solution infusion followed by outpatient hysteroscopy. Sonographic findings were compared with hysteroscopic findings.For 2D SHG, sensitivity was 71.2%; specificity, 94.1%; positive predictive value, 90.2%; negative predictive value, 81.0%; and overall accuracy, 84.2%. For 3D SHG, sensitivity was 94.2%; specificity, 98.5%; positive predictive value, 98.0%; negative predictive value, 95.7%; and overall accuracy, 96.7%. Thus, 3D SHG was superior to 2D SHG (p = .02) and comparable with outpatient hysteroscopy (p = .12) for diagnosis of intrauterine lesions.3D SHG can be used in the initial evaluation of the uterine cavity in women of reproductive age, with accuracy comparable to that of hysteroscopy.2D and 3D hysterosalpingo-contrast-sonography in the assessment of uterine cavity and tubal patency.To demonstrate the diagnostic efficacy of 2D B-mode, color and pulsed Doppler Hy-Co-Sy and 3D B-mode and power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy.One hundred and fifty-two women were recruited into the 2D B-mode, color and pulsed Doppler Hy-Co-Sy study and 116 other women were recruited into the 3D B-mode and power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy study. We assessed the diagnostic performance (sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV) of 2D and 3D Hy-Co-Sy, compared to hysteroscopy, and laparoscopy and dye test in the assessment of uterine abnormalities and tubal patency, respectively.The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 2D hysterosonography compared to hysteroscopy were 93.6, 97.3, 98.2 and 97.3%, respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 3D hysterosonography compared to hysteroscopy were 97.9, 100, 97.9 and 100%, respectively. Addition of color and pulsed Doppler to 2D Hy-Co-Sy and power Doppler to 3D Hy-Co-Sy contributed to diagnostic precision in detection of tubal patency. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 3D power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy in detection of tubal patency compared to laparoscopy and dye intubation were 100, 99.1, 99.2 and 100%, respectively.2D and 3D Hy-Co-Sy are accurate methods for evaluation of uterine abnormalities and tubal patency in infertile patients.Comparison of transvaginal 3D sonohysterography with outpatient hysteroscopy in the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding.To compare transvaginal three-dimensional sonohysterography (3D SHSG) and outpatient hysteroscopy with regards to diagnostic accuracy, procedure time, and patient discomfort with a prospective randomized controlled cohort study in a teaching hospital in London. The study included a population group of 49 women with abnormal uterine bleeding from varied ethnic backgrounds, of which 44 completed the study. Subjects with pregnancies, pelvic infections, large uteruses, suspicious or diagnosed pelvic malignancies, and who did not meet the criteria for day surgery, were excluded.Patients were randomized into two groups: group 1 had hysteroscopy followed by SHSG while group 2 had SHSG followed by hysteroscopy. Diagnostic accuracy, procedure time, and patient discomfort of SHSG in comparison to hysteroscopy were studied.A total of 44 patients completed the study. The average age of the study population was 44.8 years and the mean parity was 1.8. Nulliparas represented 34.03% of the study population and the average duration of symptoms was 14.8 months.In the investigation of women with abnormal bleeding in an outpatient setting, both hysteroscopy and SHSG are comparable in the diagnosis of intracavity lesions, pain rating, and procedure time. However patient acceptability of SHSG was significantly more when compared to outpatient hysteroscopy.Diagnostic and clinical value of 3D gel installation sonohysterography in addition to 2D gel installation sonohysterography in the assessment of intrauterine abnormalities.To study the diagnostic value of three-dimensional gel instillation sonography (3D GIS) in addition to two-dimensional (2D) GIS in the assessment of intrauterine abnormalities. Secondly, the clinical value of 3D GIS in the planning for hysteroscopic procedures was evaluated.A prospective cohort study was performed from 2008 till 2010. All women with a suspected intrauterine abnormality on 2D GIS suitable for hysteroscopic resection or with recurrent postmenstrual bleeding were planned for a hysteroscopic procedure. Diagnostic accuracy tests were calculated for the detection of fibroids and polyps with both histology and hysteroscopy as the reference standard. For the assessment of type and size of fibroids hysteroscopy was used as the reference standard. We compared the planning for type of hysteroscopy based on 2D GIS findings with the combined 2D-3D GIS findings.In total 110 patients were analysed. In comparison to histology, addition of 3D GIS did not change sensitivity or specificity substantially in the discrimination between fibroids and polyps. In comparison to hysteroscopy, sensitivity increased for detecting fibroids and polyps, without major interference with the specificity. Despite an improved accuracy after the addition of 3D GIS, the planning for hysteroscopic procedures did not improve substantially.In daily practice, the addition of 3D GIS to 2D GIS improved the accuracy for the detection of polyps and fibroids compared to hysteroscopy, but only marginally improved the planning of hysteroscopic procedures, and therefore the clinical relevance seems to be limited.Evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding by transvaginal 3-D hysterosonography and diagnostic hysteroscopy.To compare 3-D hysterosonography (3-DHS) and diagnostic hysteroscopy in women with abnormal uterine bleeding.Of 248 women with abnormal uterine bleeding who were referred to our department, 3-D hysterosonography and hysteroscopy were performed in 242 women and the results were estimated. In six women 3-DHS could not performed because of cervical stenosis. Sensitivity and specificity of 3-DHS compared to those of hysteroscopy.From the 242 women who underwent examination, we found 30 patients with polyps, 22 with myomas, four with mullerian anomalies, ten with endometrial cancer, 12 with adhesions and 165 with a normal uterine cavity. There was agreement between the two methods in 28 cases of polyps, 22 cases of myomas, four cases of mullerian anomalies, ten cases of endometrial cancer, eight cases of adhesions and in 165 cases of normal endometrium. The sensitivity and specificity of 3D hysterosonography was 93.5% and 99.4%, respectively, with a positive prognostic value (PPV) of 98.6% and a negative prognostic value (NPV) of 97%. The sensitivity and specificity of hysteroscopy was 98.7% and 99.4%, respectively, with a PPV of 98.7% and a NPV of 99.4%.Three-D hysterosonography accurately assessed intrauterine pathology.The clinical value of 3-dimensional saline infusion sonography in addition to 2-dimensional saline infusion sonography in women with abnormal uterine bleeding: work in progress.To evaluate the clinical relevance of 3-dimensional saline infusion sonography (3D-SIS) in addition to conventional SIS in women with abnormal uterine bleeding suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities.All women suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities were eligible. Before 3D-SIS, conventional SIS was performed. The results of these techniques were compared with the "combined method reference standard" (hysteroscopy, endometrial sampling, and clinical follow-up in cases with normal SIS findings). Diagnostic characteristics (with 95% confidence intervals [CIs]) of 3D-SIS and SIS were calculated as well as their respective accuracy in evaluating the histologic nature, the intrauterine extension, and the location of intrauterine abnormalities. Moreover, the reliability (kappa value) and clinical relevance of 3D-SIS were assessed.A total of 49 women were included, and 4 women were excluded. The positive predictive values of 3D-SIS and SIS were, respectively, 1.00 and 0.86 (95% CI, 0.72-0.99; P = .15), and the diagnostic accuracy values were 0.98 (95% CI, 0.94-1.0) and 0.91 (95% CI, 0.83-0.99; P = .08). Saline infusion sonography and 3D-SIS were equally accurate in evaluating the histologic nature, intrauterine extent, and location of intrauterine abnormalities (respective kappa values: 0.85 versus 0.93; P = .88; 0.83 versus 0.83; and 0.77 versus 0.80; P = .81). The reliability of 3D-SIS was good: intraobserver and interobserver agreement (kappa) were 0.78 and 0.72. Three women (6.7%) had the benefit of additional 3D-SIS: in these women, SIS wrongly led to a diagnosis of intrauterine abnormalities (P = .08).Three-dimensional saline infusion sonography is valid and reliable in women suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities and may indeed have relevant clinical value in addition to conventional SIS.Clinical value of real time 3D sonohysterography and 2D sonohysterography in comparison to hysteroscopy with subsequent histopathological examination in perimenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding.In many publications the transvaginal ultrasound is regarded as the first step to diagnose the cause of uterine bleeding in perimenopausal women. In order to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the conventional ultrasound physiological saline solution was administered to the uterine cavity and after expansion of its walls the interior uterine cavity was examined. And this procedure is called 2D sonohysterography (SIS 2D). By the ultrasound scanners which enable to get 3D real time image a spatial evaluation of the uterine cavity is possible. Clinical value of the real time 3D sonohysterography and 2D sonohysterography compared to hysteroscopy with histopathological examination in perimenopausal women.The study concerned a group of 97 perimenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding. In all of them after a standard transvaginal ultrasonography a catheter was inserted into the uterine cavity. After expansion of the uterine walls by administering about 10 ml of 0,9% saline solution the uterine cavity was examined by conventional sonohysterography. Then a 3D imaging mode was activated and the uterine interior was examined by real time 3D ultrasonography. The ultrasound results were verified by hysteroscopy, the endometrial lesions were removed and underwent a histopathological examination.In two cases the SIS examination was impossible because of uterine cervix atresion. In the rest of examined group the SIS 2D sensitivity and specificity came up to 72 and 96% respectively. In the group of SIS 3D the sensitivity and specificity reached 83 and 99% respectively.Adding SIS 3D, a minimally invasive method, to conventional sonohysterography improves the precision of diagnosis of endometrial pathology, allows to get three-dimensional image of the uterine cavity and enables examination of endometrial lesions. The diagnostic precision of this procedure is similar to the results achieved by hysteroscopy.Three-dimensional sonohysterography may replace hysteroscopy for women with perimenopausal bleeding.To investigate whether three-dimensional saline-infusion transvaginal sonohysterography can replace hysteroscopy in the detection of intrauterine lesions in women with perimenopausal bleeding.This study was carried out at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Menofyia University Hospital in Egypt. Fifty women who presented with perimenopausal bleeding and fulfilled the inclusion criteria were recruited for the study. Three-dimensional sonohysterography was performed followed by hysteroscopy for all women. Results were tabulated and statistically analyzed. The accuracy of both techniques was calculated in terms of sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values.The mean age of women enrolled was 47.5 ± 5.61 years and the mean body mass index was 28.13 ± 2.91 kg/m(2). Three-dimensional sonohysterography detected no abnormality in 26 women but hysteroscopy only detected 24 with no abnormality. Compared to hysteroscopy, three-dimensional sonohysterography has sensitivities of 100% and 92% in the detection of endometrial polyps and submucous fibroids, respectively. The specificity of sonohysterography for both lesions was 100%. The sensitivity and specificity for other lesions exceeded 95%.Three-dimensional sonohysterosonography may be considered as an effective alternative to hysteroscopy in the assessment of the uterine cavity for any woman with perimenopausal bleeding.Three-dimensional hysterosonography versus hysteroscopy for the detection of intracavitary uterine abnormalities.To compare 3-dimentional hysterosonography (3-DHS) and diagnostic hysteroscopy for the evaluation of intrauterine lesions.In this prospective study 124 women with suspected intrauterine abnormality on 2-D ultrasonography or on hysterosalpingography were scheduled to undergo hysteroscopy, 3-DHS, and 3-D power Doppler (3-DPD) examination. However, 3-DHS could not be performed in 3 of the women because of cervical stenosis. The sensitivity and specificity of 3-DHS and 3-DPD were compared with those of hysteroscopy.Of the 121 women found to have an intracavitary abnormality, 20 had polyps, 11 had myomas, 2 had Müllerian duct anomalies, and 6 had synechiae on hysteroscopy. There was agreement between hysteroscopy and 3-DHS in 19 of the polyp cases, 11 of the myoma cases, 2 of the Müllerian anomaly cases, and 4 of the synechiae cases. Examination with 3-DHS and 3-DPD reached a sensitivity of 91.9% and specificity of 98.8%, with a positive predictive value of 97.1% and a negative predictive value of 96.5%, respectively.Examination with 3-DHS and 3-DPD both allows for accurate assessment of intrauterine abnormalities.Value of 3-dimensional sonohysterography in infertility work-up.To compare the diagnostic value of 2-dimensional (2D) and 3-dimensional (3D) sonohysterography (SHG) and outpatient hysteroscopy (OH) in detecting intrauterine lesions in infertile women.Comparative, observational, cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force Classification II-2).University hospital.One hundred eighty women with a normal uterine cavity at transvaginal ultrasound and hysterosalpingography (HSG) underwent infertility workup at our outpatient clinic.All patients underwent 2D-SHG, 3D-SHG, and OH.Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), negative predictive value (NPV), and accuracy of 2D-SHG and 3D-SHG were compared with OH in detecting intrauterine lesions. For 2D-SHG, sensitivity was 0.70 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.49-0.85), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.96-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.79-1.0), NPV was 0.95 (95% CI, 0.9-0.97), and accuracy was 95.5%. For 3D-SHG, sensitivity was 0.92 (95% CI, 0.74-0.98), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.97-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (05% CI, 0.83-1.0), NPV was 0.98 (95% CI, 0.95-0.99), and accuracy was 98.8%. For OH, sensitivity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.85-1.0), specificity was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.97-1.0), PPV was 1.0 (95% CI, 0.84-1.0), NPV was 1.0 (0.97-1.0), and accuracy was 100%. Thus, 3D-SHG is comparable to OH in diagnosing intrauterine lesions (p = .23), and both are superior to 2D-SHG (p <0.001).The diagnostic value of 3D-SHG is comparable to OH in detecting intrauterine lesions, and both are superior to 2 D-SHG. 3D-SHG should be included in the infertility workup even in women with a normal uterine cavity at transvaginal ultrasound or hysterosalpingography.3D sonohysterography vs hysteroscopy: a cross-sectional study for the evaluation of endouterine diseases.To assess the concordance between the presumed diagnosis obtained with the 3D sonohysterography (SHG) and with the diagnostic hysteroscopy (HYS); to determine whether the 3D SHG has the accuracy needed to be considered as a diagnostic screening standard in cases of suspected endouterine pathology.We selected 224 patients who voluntarily decided to undergo 3D SHG from a population with suspected presence of endouterine disease at TVS. The patients underwent first 3D SHG and then diagnostic HYS. We recorded each patient's discomfort/pain during the two techniques. We used the "Bayes Theorem" to calculate the sensitivity and specificity of the 3D SHG as compared to HYS.Overall the 3D SHG diagnosis was confirmed in 156/224 cases (69.64 %). Concordance for endometrial thickening was 0 %; for Asherman's syndrome was 50.00 %; for polyp was 77.78 %; and for myoma, mucus accumulation and Müllerian anomalies (arcuate uterus, septate and subseptate uterus) was 100.00 %. Furthermore, 3D SHG was better tolerated than HYS.Despite the diagnostic accuracy and mini-invasiveness of 3D SHG, we suggest that it cannot be a substitute of HYS in endouterine disease diagnosis, but it could be considered as a good method of screening to address patients to hysteroscopic confirmation.Value of 3-dimensional sonohysterography for detection of intrauterine lesions in women with abnormal uterine bleeding.To compare 2-dimensional (2D) sonohysterography (SHG) and 3D-SHG with saline solution infusion vs diagnostic hysteroscopy for investigation of intrauterine lesions in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding.Comparative observational cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force classification II-1).University hospital.Fifty perimenopausal and 20 postmenopausal women with abnormal intrauterine bleeding with clinically or ultrasonically suspected intrauterine lesions.Conventional 2D- and 3D ultrasonography and 2D- and 3D-SHG with saline solution infusion followed by diagnostic hysteroscopy, and endometrial curettage or subsequent operative treatment (e.g., hysterectomy, myomectomy, or polypectomy). Ultrasonographic and hysteroscopic findings were compared with histopathologic findings.For 2D-SHG, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, overall accuracy, likelihood ratio for a positive result, and likelihood ratio for a negative result were 79%, 72%, 89%, 54%, 76%, 2.82, and 0.29, respectively, and for 3D-SHG, were 92%, 89%, 96%, 80%, 91%, 8.36, and 0.09, respectively; and for diagnostic hysteroscopy, were 94%, 89%, 96%, 84%, 93%, 8.55, and 0.07, respectively. Thus, 3D-SHG was superior to 2D SHG (p = .02) and comparable to diagnostic hysteroscopy (p = .75) for diagnosis of intrauterine lesions.3D-SHG can be used in the initial investigation of intrauterine lesions in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding before resorting to invasive procedures such as diagnostic hysteroscopy. Further studies of computer-reconstructed 3D-SHG virtual hysteroscopy are recommended.Saline infusion sonohysterography versus hysteroscopy for uterine cavity evaluation.The most frequent procedures performed on women with abnormal uterine bleeding are 2D and 3D ultrasound. The most common accepted approach for the management of abnormal uterine bleeding is 2D TV scan followed by therapeutic hysteroscopy. The purpose of this prospective study was to assess whether 3D saline infusion sonohysterography (3D SIS) could replace diagnostic hysteroscopy (DH) for the diagnosis of endometrial pathology, in patients with abnormal uterine bleeding.A prospective study in the ultrasound department of the Women's Specialized Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia from January 2008 to February 2010.0One hundred and one patients with abnormal uterine bleeding, suspected to have endometrial abnormality by 2D and 3D transvaginal scan, were prospectively studied. Of these, 55 patients had undergone both 3D SIS and DH, followed by verification of results with histopathology.Upon comparison of 3D SIS and DH individually with histopathology, specificity and sensitivity for 3D SIS were 67% and 100%, respectively, and for hysteroscopy 67% and 98%, respectively. In addition, the positive predictive value and negative predictive value were 98% and 100%, respectively, for 3D SIS, while for DH they were 98% and 67%, respectively.3D SIS is a safe alternative to hysteroscopy. However, larger randomized controlled trials should be conducted to ascertain the validity and reliability of this advantageous, less-invasive procedure, for women with abnormal uterine bleeding, who require evaluation of the endometrial cavity.The diagnostic accuracy of two- vs three-dimensional sonohysterography for evaluation of the uterine cavity in the reproductive age.To compare 2-dimensional sonohysterography (2D SHG) vs 3-dimensional sonohysterography (3D SHG) using saline solution infusion, with outpatient hysteroscopy as the gold standard, for evaluation of the uterine cavity in women of reproductive age.Comparative observational cross-sectional study (Canadian Task Force classification II-2).University hospital.One hundred twenty women of reproductive age with abnormal uterine bleeding, infertility, or recurrent pregnancy loss and with clinically and/or ultrasongraphically suspected intrauterine lesions.All patients underwent 2D SHG and 3D SHG using saline solution infusion followed by outpatient hysteroscopy. Sonographic findings were compared with hysteroscopic findings.For 2D SHG, sensitivity was 71.2%; specificity, 94.1%; positive predictive value, 90.2%; negative predictive value, 81.0%; and overall accuracy, 84.2%. For 3D SHG, sensitivity was 94.2%; specificity, 98.5%; positive predictive value, 98.0%; negative predictive value, 95.7%; and overall accuracy, 96.7%. Thus, 3D SHG was superior to 2D SHG (p = .02) and comparable with outpatient hysteroscopy (p = .12) for diagnosis of intrauterine lesions.3D SHG can be used in the initial evaluation of the uterine cavity in women of reproductive age, with accuracy comparable to that of hysteroscopy.2D and 3D hysterosalpingo-contrast-sonography in the assessment of uterine cavity and tubal patency.To demonstrate the diagnostic efficacy of 2D B-mode, color and pulsed Doppler Hy-Co-Sy and 3D B-mode and power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy.One hundred and fifty-two women were recruited into the 2D B-mode, color and pulsed Doppler Hy-Co-Sy study and 116 other women were recruited into the 3D B-mode and power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy study. We assessed the diagnostic performance (sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV) of 2D and 3D Hy-Co-Sy, compared to hysteroscopy, and laparoscopy and dye test in the assessment of uterine abnormalities and tubal patency, respectively.The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 2D hysterosonography compared to hysteroscopy were 93.6, 97.3, 98.2 and 97.3%, respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 3D hysterosonography compared to hysteroscopy were 97.9, 100, 97.9 and 100%, respectively. Addition of color and pulsed Doppler to 2D Hy-Co-Sy and power Doppler to 3D Hy-Co-Sy contributed to diagnostic precision in detection of tubal patency. The sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV of 3D power Doppler Hy-Co-Sy in detection of tubal patency compared to laparoscopy and dye intubation were 100, 99.1, 99.2 and 100%, respectively.2D and 3D Hy-Co-Sy are accurate methods for evaluation of uterine abnormalities and tubal patency in infertile patients.Comparison of transvaginal 3D sonohysterography with outpatient hysteroscopy in the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding.To compare transvaginal three-dimensional sonohysterography (3D SHSG) and outpatient hysteroscopy with regards to diagnostic accuracy, procedure time, and patient discomfort with a prospective randomized controlled cohort study in a teaching hospital in London. The study included a population group of 49 women with abnormal uterine bleeding from varied ethnic backgrounds, of which 44 completed the study. Subjects with pregnancies, pelvic infections, large uteruses, suspicious or diagnosed pelvic malignancies, and who did not meet the criteria for day surgery, were excluded.Patients were randomized into two groups: group 1 had hysteroscopy followed by SHSG while group 2 had SHSG followed by hysteroscopy. Diagnostic accuracy, procedure time, and patient discomfort of SHSG in comparison to hysteroscopy were studied.A total of 44 patients completed the study. The average age of the study population was 44.8 years and the mean parity was 1.8. Nulliparas represented 34.03% of the study population and the average duration of symptoms was 14.8 months.In the investigation of women with abnormal bleeding in an outpatient setting, both hysteroscopy and SHSG are comparable in the diagnosis of intracavity lesions, pain rating, and procedure time. However patient acceptability of SHSG was significantly more when compared to outpatient hysteroscopy.Diagnostic and clinical value of 3D gel installation sonohysterography in addition to 2D gel installation sonohysterography in the assessment of intrauterine abnormalities.To study the diagnostic value of three-dimensional gel instillation sonography (3D GIS) in addition to two-dimensional (2D) GIS in the assessment of intrauterine abnormalities. Secondly, the clinical value of 3D GIS in the planning for hysteroscopic procedures was evaluated.A prospective cohort study was performed from 2008 till 2010. All women with a suspected intrauterine abnormality on 2D GIS suitable for hysteroscopic resection or with recurrent postmenstrual bleeding were planned for a hysteroscopic procedure. Diagnostic accuracy tests were calculated for the detection of fibroids and polyps with both histology and hysteroscopy as the reference standard. For the assessment of type and size of fibroids hysteroscopy was used as the reference standard. We compared the planning for type of hysteroscopy based on 2D GIS findings with the combined 2D-3D GIS findings.In total 110 patients were analysed. In comparison to histology, addition of 3D GIS did not change sensitivity or specificity substantially in the discrimination between fibroids and polyps. In comparison to hysteroscopy, sensitivity increased for detecting fibroids and polyps, without major interference with the specificity. Despite an improved accuracy after the addition of 3D GIS, the planning for hysteroscopic procedures did not improve substantially.In daily practice, the addition of 3D GIS to 2D GIS improved the accuracy for the detection of polyps and fibroids compared to hysteroscopy, but only marginally improved the planning of hysteroscopic procedures, and therefore the clinical relevance seems to be limited.Evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding by transvaginal 3-D hysterosonography and diagnostic hysteroscopy.To compare 3-D hysterosonography (3-DHS) and diagnostic hysteroscopy in women with abnormal uterine bleeding.Of 248 women with abnormal uterine bleeding who were referred to our department, 3-D hysterosonography and hysteroscopy were performed in 242 women and the results were estimated. In six women 3-DHS could not performed because of cervical stenosis. Sensitivity and specificity of 3-DHS compared to those of hysteroscopy.From the 242 women who underwent examination, we found 30 patients with polyps, 22 with myomas, four with mullerian anomalies, ten with endometrial cancer, 12 with adhesions and 165 with a normal uterine cavity. There was agreement between the two methods in 28 cases of polyps, 22 cases of myomas, four cases of mullerian anomalies, ten cases of endometrial cancer, eight cases of adhesions and in 165 cases of normal endometrium. The sensitivity and specificity of 3D hysterosonography was 93.5% and 99.4%, respectively, with a positive prognostic value (PPV) of 98.6% and a negative prognostic value (NPV) of 97%. The sensitivity and specificity of hysteroscopy was 98.7% and 99.4%, respectively, with a PPV of 98.7% and a NPV of 99.4%.Three-D hysterosonography accurately assessed intrauterine pathology.The clinical value of 3-dimensional saline infusion sonography in addition to 2-dimensional saline infusion sonography in women with abnormal uterine bleeding: work in progress.To evaluate the clinical relevance of 3-dimensional saline infusion sonography (3D-SIS) in addition to conventional SIS in women with abnormal uterine bleeding suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities.All women suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities were eligible. Before 3D-SIS, conventional SIS was performed. The results of these techniques were compared with the "combined method reference standard" (hysteroscopy, endometrial sampling, and clinical follow-up in cases with normal SIS findings). Diagnostic characteristics (with 95% confidence intervals [CIs]) of 3D-SIS and SIS were calculated as well as their respective accuracy in evaluating the histologic nature, the intrauterine extension, and the location of intrauterine abnormalities. Moreover, the reliability (kappa value) and clinical relevance of 3D-SIS were assessed.A total of 49 women were included, and 4 women were excluded. The positive predictive values of 3D-SIS and SIS were, respectively, 1.00 and 0.86 (95% CI, 0.72-0.99; P = .15), and the diagnostic accuracy values were 0.98 (95% CI, 0.94-1.0) and 0.91 (95% CI, 0.83-0.99; P = .08). Saline infusion sonography and 3D-SIS were equally accurate in evaluating the histologic nature, intrauterine extent, and location of intrauterine abnormalities (respective kappa values: 0.85 versus 0.93; P = .88; 0.83 versus 0.83; and 0.77 versus 0.80; P = .81). The reliability of 3D-SIS was good: intraobserver and interobserver agreement (kappa) were 0.78 and 0.72. Three women (6.7%) had the benefit of additional 3D-SIS: in these women, SIS wrongly led to a diagnosis of intrauterine abnormalities (P = .08).Three-dimensional saline infusion sonography is valid and reliable in women suspected of having intrauterine abnormalities and may indeed have relevant clinical value in addition to conventional SIS.Clinical value of real time 3D sonohysterography and 2D sonohysterography in comparison to hysteroscopy with subsequent histopathological examination in perimenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding.In many publications the transvaginal ultrasound is regarded as the first step to diagnose the cause of uterine bleeding in perimenopausal women. In order to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the conventional ultrasound physiological saline solution was administered to the uterine cavity and after expansion of its walls the interior uterine cavity was examined. And this procedure is called 2D sonohysterography (SIS 2D). By the ultrasound scanners which enable to get 3D real time image a spatial evaluation of the uterine cavity is possible. Clinical value of the real time 3D sonohysterography and 2D sonohysterography compared to hysteroscopy with histopathological examination in perimenopausal women.The study concerned a group of 97 perimenopausal women with abnormal uterine bleeding. In all of them after a standard transvaginal ultrasonography a catheter was inserted into the uterine cavity. After expansion of the uterine walls by administering about 10 ml of 0,9% saline solution the uterine cavity was examined by conventional sonohysterography. Then a 3D imaging mode was activated and the uterine interior was examined by real time 3D ultrasonography. The ultrasound results were verified by hysteroscopy, the endometrial lesions were removed and underwent a histopathological examination.In two cases the SIS examination was impossible because of uterine cervix atresion. In the rest of examined group the SIS 2D sensitivity and specificity came up to 72 and 96% respectively. In the group of SIS 3D the sensitivity and specificity reached 83 and 99% respectively.Adding SIS 3D, a minimally invasive method, to conventional sonohysterography improves the precision of diagnosis of endometrial pathology, allows to get three-dimensional image of the uterine cavity and enables examination of endometrial lesions. The diagnostic precision of this procedure is similar to the results achieved by hysteroscopy.Three-dimensional sonohysterography may replace hysteroscopy for women with perimenopausal bleeding.To investigate whether three-dimensional saline-infusion transvaginal sonohysterography can replace hysteroscopy in the detection of intrauterine lesions in women with perimenopausal bleeding.This study was carried out at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Menofyia University Hospital in Egypt. Fifty women who presented with perimenopausal bleeding and fulfilled the inclusion criteria were recruited for the study. Three-dimensional sonohysterography was performed followed by hysteroscopy for all women. Results were tabulated and statistically analyzed. The accuracy of both techniques was calculated in terms of sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values.The mean age of women enrolled was 47.5 ± 5.61 years and the mean body mass index was 28.13 ± 2.91 kg/m(2). Three-dimensional sonohysterography detected no abnormality in 26 women but hysteroscopy only detected 24 with no abnormality. Compared to hysteroscopy, three-dimensional sonohysterography has sensitivities of 100% and 92% in the detection of endometrial polyps and submucous fibroids, respectively. The specificity of sonohysterography for both lesions was 100%. The sensitivity and specificity for other lesions exceeded 95%.Three-dimensional sonohysterosonography may be considered as an effective alternative to hysteroscopy in the assessment of the uterine cavity for any woman with perimenopausal bleeding.Three-dimensional hysterosonography versus hysteroscopy for the detection of intracavitary uterine abnormalities.To compare 3-dimentional hysterosonography (3-DHS) and diagnostic hysteroscopy for the evaluation of intrauterine lesions.In this prospective study 124 women with suspected intrauterine abnormality on 2-D ultrasonography or on hysterosalpingography were scheduled to undergo hysteroscopy, 3-DHS, and 3-D power Doppler (3-DPD) examination. However, 3-DHS could not be performed in 3 of the women because of cervical stenosis. The sensitivity and specificity of 3-DHS and 3-DPD were compared with those of hysteroscopy.Of the 121 women found to have an intracavitary abnormality, 20 had polyps, 11 had myomas, 2 had Müllerian duct anomalies, and 6 had synechiae on hysteroscopy. There was agreement between hysteroscopy and 3-DHS in 19 of the polyp cases, 11 of the myoma cases, 2 of the Müllerian anomaly cases, and 4 of the synechiae cases. Examination with 3-DHS and 3-DPD reached a sensitivity of 91.9% and specificity of 98.8%, with a positive predictive value of 97.1% and a negative predictive value of 96.5%, respectively.Examination with 3-DHS and 3-DPD both allows for accurate assessment of intrauterine abnormalities.