Tumor markers and transvaginal ultrasonography in the diagnosis of endometrioma.To evaluate the accuracy of CA 19.9 plasma levels (with or without CA 125 levels) combined with transvaginal ultrasonography in the differential diagnosis of endometrioma.One hundred eighteen consecutive premenopausal nonpregnant women had laparoscopy or laparotomy between November 1994 and November 1995 because of the presence of a persistent adnexal mass. They underwent transvaginal ultrasonography and measurement of CA 19.9 and CA 125 plasma levels within 2 days before surgery. The ultrasonographic impression and the tumor marker values were compared with the histopathologic diagnosis. The overall agreement between the test result and the actual outcome was calculated using the kappa statistic.Transvaginal ultrasonography had a strong agreement between test result and surgery (kappa value 0.84), whereas the combined methods were associated with a lower kappa value (range 0.24-0.80).Transvaginal ultrasonography used alone is the most cost-effective method in the preoperative differential diagnosis of endometrioma.A predictive model for endometriosis.Aromatase is the key enzyme in the process of estrogen biosynthesis from the precursor androgen. Recently, aromatase has been found to be aberrantly expressed in eutopic endometrium of patients suffering from endometriosis. This finding has prompted speculation about the contribution of this enzyme to the prediction of this disease.We prospectively aimed to evaluate whether endometrial biopsy, prior to laparoscopy in symptomatic women to screen for the presence of aromatase by real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, combined with select patients' characteristics, is of value to predict endometriosis.Of 48 consecutive symptomatic and eligible patients, 25 (52.1%) exhibited endometriosis and 23 (47.9%) were disease-free. A multiple logistic regression model revealed that 95.5% of patients whose eutopic endometrium was found to be positive for aromatase mRNA as well as immunohistochemically detected protein and who were additionally suffering from moderate to severe dysmenorrhoea (visual analogue scale score >4/10) exhibited endometriosis at laparoscopy.These findings provide direct evidence that screening for eutopic endometrial aromatase in combination with clinical data could be of discriminative value in the prediction of disease.Validation study of nonsurgical diagnosis of endometriosis.To determine whether the surgical diagnosis of endometriosis can be predicted using symptoms, signs, and ultrasound findings.Prospective study (study sample); retrospective record review (test sample).Hospital of Desio (study sample) and Mangiagalli Hospital (test sample), Italy.Ninety women scheduled to undergo laparoscopy or laparotomy (study sample); 120 women who underwent laparoscopy (test sample).The study sample group was interviewed before surgery about infertility and dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and noncyclic pelvic pain and each member had a pelvic examination and a transvaginal ultrasound. At surgery, endometriosis was noted. For the test sample, the same information was abstracted from medical records after laparoscopy.The ability of symptoms, signs, and ultrasound to predict endometriosis at surgery. A classification tree was developed with the study sample and evaluated with the test sample.Ovarian endometriosis, but not nonovarian endometriosis, could be reliably predicted with noninvasive tools. Ultrasound and examination best predicted ovarian endometriosis, correctly classifying 100% of cases with no false positive diagnoses in the study sample. Similar results were found in the test sample.Noninvasive tools may be used to identify women with ovarian, but not nonovarian endometriosis, with excellent agreement with surgical diagnosis.Evaluation of elevated urinary enolase I levels in patients with endometriosis.The aim of this study is to validate and investigate the clinical value of urinary enolase I in patients with endometriosis.Urine samples of 39 patients with histologically confirmed endometriosis and 20 patients without endometriosis were collected. Western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to detect the increase of enolase I in patients' urine.Urinary enolase I expression corrected for creatinine ratio (non neuronal enolase (NNE)-Cr) was significantly greater in patients with endometriosis (p = 0.026). When the diagnostic performance of NNE-Cr was evaluated with serum CA-125 combination, the area under the curve was 0.821 (95% confidence interval 0.713-0.928) with sensitivity and specificity of 76.9% and 85.0%, respectively.Elevated urinary enolase I, in conjunction with serum CA-125, may be used as a potential biomarker for endometriosis.Urinary vitamin D-binding protein is elevated in patients with endometriosis.Recently, proteomic technologies have demonstrated that several proteins are differently expressed in various body fluids of patients with endometriosis compared with those without this condition. The aim of this study was to investigate proteins secreted in urine of patients with endometriosis using proteomic techniques in order to identify potential markers for the clinical diagnosis of endometriosis.Urine samples were collected from women undergoing laparoscopy for different indications including pelvic masses, pelvic pain, suspicious endometriosis, infertility and diagnostic evaluation. Proteomic techniques and mass spectrometry were used to identify proteins secreted in the urine of the patients with and without endometriosis and quantification of identified protein was performed using western blot and specific commercial sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA).Twenty-two protein spots were differentially expressed in the urine of patients with and without endometriosis, one of which was identified as urinary vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP). ELISA quantification of urinary VDBP corrected for creatinine expression (VDBP-Cr) revealed that urinary VDBP-Cr was significantly greater in patients with endometriosis than in those without (111.96 ± 74.59 versus 69.90 ± 43.76 ng/mg Cr, P = 0.001). VDBP-Cr had limited value as a diagnostic marker for endometriosis (Sensitivity 58%, Specificity 76%). When combined with serum CA-125 levels (the product of serum CA-125 and urinary VDBP-Cr), it did not significantly increase the diagnostic power of serum CA-125 alone.Urinary VDBP levels are elevated in patients with endometriosis. They have limited value as a potential diagnostic biomarker for endometriosis but suggest it would be worthwhile to investigate other urinary proteins for this purpose.Combination of non-invasive and semi-invasive tests for diagnosis of minimal to mild endometriosis.Non-surgical diagnostic approach for endometriosis would be of great gain to both physicians and patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of serum measurement of IL-6 combined with the presence of nerve fibres in the functional layer of endometrium for diagnosis of minimal-mild endometriosis.In this prospective study 114 women who underwent laparoscopy for infertility and/or pelvic pain were divided into two groups: control cases (40 cases) with no pathologic findings; and endometriosis patients (74 cases) [subdivided into stages 1-2 or minimal-mild (MM) and stages 3-4 or moderate-severe cases]. Blood was drawn one day before laparoscopy and stored for subsequent analysis of IL-6. Endometrial biopsy was obtained prior to laparoscopy and Immunohistochemistry was performed using the pan-neuronal marker protein gene product 9.5(PGP9.5). Then laparoscopic diagnosis of endometriosis confirmed by histopathology was done.Serum IL-6 with a threshold of 15.4 pg/ml was found to be able to diagnose MM endometriosis with 89.5 % sensitivity and 82.5 % specificity, but sensitivity and specificity of presence of nerve fibres in the functional layer of endometrium were 92 % and 80 % respectively. When two diagnostic modalities were combined the sensitivity and specificity were raised to 100 and 92.5 % respectively.Combination of both serum IL-6 and presence of nerve fibres in the endometrium is more reliable method for diagnosis of MM endometriosis than in single test.Transvaginal ultrasound and computed tomography combined with clinical parameters and CA-125 determinations in the differential diagnosis of persistent ovarian cysts in premenopausal women.The purpose of this prospective study was to compare the accuracy of computed tomography (CT) and transvaginal ultrasonography in the differential diagnosis of persistent cystic ovarian lesions. The candidates for this study were 161 premenopausal non-pregnant women with an adnexal mass. After a 3-month follow-up, 83 masses persisted and were examined by both techniques before surgery. We also evaluated the CA-125 plasma levels. The CT and ultrasonographic diagnoses were then compared with the histopathological diagnosis. The overall agreement between the test results and the actual outcome was calculated by means of the kappa statistic. Transvaginal ultrasonography has a closer accuracy in the diagnosis of serous cysts and serous cystadenoma, ovarian carcinoma and endometrioma (value of kappa: 0.78, 0.73 and 0.80, respectively) than CT, even if the latter is associated with clinical and biochemical parameters such as patient's age and CA-125 plasma levels. Only in the diagnosis of cystic teratoma, is transvaginal ultrasonography less accurate than CT. In conclusion, in premenopausal women, transvaginal ultrasonography remains a cost-effective method in the diagnosis of most cystic ovarian lesions.[Diagnostic value of the detection of aromatase cytochrome P450 and CA125 for endometriosis].To evaluate the diagnostic value of examining endometrial biopsy specimens for aromatase cytochrome P450 and CA125 for endometriosis.The expression of aromatase cytochrome P450 in endometrium was detected by immunohistochemical analysis for 36 endometriosis women and 22 non-endometriosis but subfertility or pelvic pain women served as controls; the serum CA125 levels were measured by chemical radiation method.By measuring serum CA125, the sensitivity of the serum CA125 assay was 44%, the specificity was 82%, the positive predictive value was 80%, and the negative predictive value was 47%; the sensitivity of aromatase cytochrome P450 in biopsy endometrium of endometriosis was 82%, the specificity was 59%, the positive predictive value was 76%, and the negative predictive value was 67%.The combination assay of aromatase cytochrome P450 in eutopic endometrium and CA125 can be used as a diagnostic test for endometriosis, especially for the early stage of endometriosis, which is superior to the assay of CA125.Evaluation of serum and urinary angiogenic factors in patients with endometriosis.The aim of this study was to evaluate serum and urinary levels of vascular endothelial growth factors, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1) in patients with endometriosis.During surgery for pelvic pain, pelvic mass or infertility, serum and urine were collected. Of 70 patients, 46 had histology-proven endometriosis and 24 patients without endometriosis participated as controls.Serum TNF-alpha levels and urinary sFlt-1 levels corrected for creatinine excretion were significantly increased in the endometriosis group (P=0.001 and P=0.011 respectively). Serum sFlt-1 levels and urinary sFlt-1 levels corrected for creatinine were significantly higher in patients with minimal-to-mild disease (P=0.014 and P=0.015 respectively), where serum TNF-alpha levels were increased in moderate-to-severe endometriosis (P<0.001).The pathogenesis of minimal-to-mild endometriosis and moderate-to-severe endometriosis seems to be different. Increased sFlt-1 levels in serum and urine of minimal-to-mild disease indicate that sFlt-1 may have an important role in inhibiting angiogenic process of the disease.Autoimmune phenomena in infertile patients with endometriosis.To assess the presence of autoimmune factors in patients with endometriosis, endometrial homogenates, peritoneal fluid, and serum were evaluated in 23 patients with endometriosis and 22 control subjects. The methods used were Ouchterlony immunodiffusion, immunoelectrophoresis, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and radial immunodiffusion. The study demonstrated precipitation lines between endometrial homogenates and serum from some endometriosis patients but not from the control subjects. Immunoelectrophoresis demonstrated precipitation lines at beta-globulin position when endometrial homogenates were used against serum of patients with endometriosis and with goat antihuman serum. It is suggested that an antigen, possibly a glycoprotein, is present in the endometrial homogenates. Radial immunodiffusion studies for immunoglobulins (Ig) G, A, and M and complement components C3c and C4 showed significantly higher concentrations of C3c and C4 in serum and peritoneal fluid of patients with endometriosis than the control subjects (P less than .05). There was no significant difference in concentration of IgG, A, M, factor B, and properdin.Patients with endometriosis of the rectosigmoid have a higher percentage of natural killer cells in peripheral blood.To estimate the concentration of natural killer (NK) cells in the peripheral blood in patients with and without endometriosis.Case-control study (Canadian Task Force classification II-2).Tertiary referral hospital.One hundred fifty-five patients who had undergone videolaparoscopy were divided into 2 groups: those with endometriosis (n = 100) and those without endometriosis (n = 55).The percentage of NK cells relative to peripheral lymphocytes was quantified at flow cytometry in 155 patients who had undergone laparoscopy. In addition to verifying the presence of endometriosis, stage of disease and the sites affected were also evaluated.The mean (SD) percentage of NK cells was higher (15.3% [9.8%]) in patients with endometriosis than in the group without the disease (10.6% [5.8%]) (p < .001). The percentage of NK cells was highest (19.8 [10.3%]) in patients with advanced stages of endometriosis and in those in whom the rectosigmoid colon was affected. In a statistical model of probability, the association of this marker (NK cells ≥11%) with the presence of symptoms such as pain and intestinal bleeding during menstruation and the absence of previous pregnancy yielded a 78% likelihood of the rectosigmoid colon being affected.Compared with patients without endometriosis, those with endometriosis demonstrate a higher concentration of peripheral NK cells. The percentage of NK cells is greater, primarily in patients with advanced stages of endometriosis involving the rectosigmoid colon. Therefore, it may serve as a diagnostic marker for this type of severe endometriosis, in particular if considered in conjunction with the symptoms.Transvaginal ultrasonography combined with CA-125 plasma levels in the diagnosis of endometrioma.To assess the role of transvaginal ultrasonography combined with CA-125 plasma levels in the diagnosis of endometrioma.Prospective study with pathological confirmation of the diagnosis.Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the University of Cagliari, Italy.One hundred one consecutive premenopausal nonpregnant women submitted to laparoscopy or laparotomy, from November 1993 to October 1994, because of the presence of an adnexal mass.Within 2 days before surgery all patients underwent transvaginal ultrasonography and evaluation of CA-125 plasma levels. The ultrasonographic impression and the CA-125 value were then compared with the histopathological diagnosis.The overall agreement between the test result and the actual outcome was calculated using the kappa index for the transvaginal ultrasonography used alone and for the combination of transvaginal ultrasonography and CA-125 values, for each chosen cutoff and range.Transvaginal ultrasonography has a strong agreement between test and surgery (kappa value 0.76) whereas the combined use of the two methods is associated with a lower kappa index, ranging from 0.40 to 0.69.Transvaginal ultrasonography used alone has a better predictive capacity in differentiating endometrioma from other adnexal masses than combined methods.Comparison of transvaginal sonography and bimanual pelvic examination in patients with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis.To determine the usefulness of noninvasive clinical tests to diagnose symptomatic endometriosis, we retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 91 patients with chronic pelvic pain and laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis. Thirty-seven women (41%) had pelvic peritoneal endometrial implants with adhesions; in 44 (48%) the ovaries were also affected, and in 10 (11%) the disease involved both the uterus and ovaries. Seventy-nine (87%) women had dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, or both. Forty-three (47%) had a normal bimanual pelvic examination and 37 (41%) an unremarkable transvaginal sonographic evaluation (no significant difference). The women were divided into two groups: group 1, in whom the disease extended to the ovaries and uterus, and group 2, those in whom only peritoneal implants and adhesions were present. In group 1, 48 women (89%) had an abnormal ultrasonographic evaluation compared with only 4 (11%) in group 2 (p <0.001). Our findings indicate that bimanual pelvic examination and transvaginal sonography are equally accurate in detecting endometriosis; however, when the uterine surface and ovaries are involved, the latter is more informative. Therefore, patients with chronic pelvic pain, especially pain related to menstruation or coitus, should be evaluated laparoscopically to diagnose mild endometriosis adequately.Transvaginal ultrasonography combined with pelvic examination in the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma.The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy of TVS and TVS combined with pelvic examination for the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma. Three hundred and five ovarian masses of 244 patients with either pre-operative or post-operative diagnosis of ovarian tumor and received TVS between January 1, 1996 and December 31, 1998 were included in the study. Of 305 masses, 221 endometriomas of 164 patients were diagnosed histologically. The efficacy of TVS was 84.9 per cent with a sensitivity of 92.3 per cent and specificity of 70.2 per cent. LR+ and LR- were 3.1 and 0.1 respectively. The combination of TVS and pelvic examination with either positive test had a higher sensitivity (98.8%) but lower specificity (26.6%). This combination dramatically improved NPV (97.5%) and LR- (0.05), whereas, the combination with both positive tests had a sensitivity of 78.1 per cent, and specificity of 81.5 per cent. LR+ and LR- were not different from those using TVS alone. In conclusion, the study has shown the role of TVS in the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma. The combination of TVS and pelvic examination may be useful in ruling out the disease. However, a further prospective study should be performed to confirm the efficacy of the combination.Cytokeratin-19 as a biomarker in urine and in serum for the diagnosis of endometriosis--a prospective study.Endometriosis compromises the quality of life of countless women worldwide and is a leading cause of disability. Clinical symptoms of endometriosis can be very heterogeneous leading to a long interval between onset of symptoms and surgical diagnosis. A noninvasive, rapid diagnostic test is urgently needed. In this prospective study, we evaluated the usefulness of Cytokeratin-19 (CK19) as a biomarker for the diagnosis of endometriosis through urine and serum ELISA. 76 reproductive-aged women undergoing laparoscopy for benign conditions were included to this study and divided into two groups by the presence (n = 44) or absence (n = 32) of endometriosis. There was no statistically significant correlation between the concentration of CK19 in urine (p = 0.51) or in serum (p = 0.77) and the diagnosis of endometriosis. Assigning the samples to the proliferative or secretory cycle stage did not sufficiently lower the p values. In this study, the promising data reported in the recent literature about CK19 serving as a sufficient biomarker for endometriosis could not be verified when tested in a larger sample size. Further studies are warranted to explore the usefulness of CK19 in the diagnosis of endometriosis.CA 125 in serum, peritoneal fluid, active lesions, and endometrium of patients with endometriosis.Ca 125 levels in serum and peritoneal fluid were measured in 39 patients with endometriosis and 18 patients with normal pelvic anatomy at laparoscopy, and the presence of this antigen in endometriotic tissue and endometrial mucosa was also investigated. Serum CA 125 concentrations were elevated in patients with Stage III or IV endometriosis compared with control subjects (32.9 +/- 11.2 versus 16.4 +/- 8.9 U/ml, means +/- SD; p less than 0.001). CA 125 values were greater than 35 U/ml in 36.8% of women with Stage III or IV endometriosis and in none of the control subjects. No significant differences in CA 125 levels in peritoneal fluid were found between patients with endometriosis and control subjects. The immunohistochemical studies found CA 125 in 10% of the endometriotic lesions and 37.5% of the endometrial samples of patients with endometriosis and in 33.3% of the endometrial samples of control subjects.Hormonal and immunologic methods in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with benign ovarian tumors and endometriotic cysts.To compare efficacy of various methods for characterizing endometriosis and benign ovarian tumors.Two parallel groups of patients, 54 with endometriotic ovarian cysts and 48 with benign tumors.Central clinic.Patients referred from all regions over a 5-year period.Estrogen Estrogen and progesterone receptor levels of endometrium and endometriotic foci, CA-125 concentration, and estradiol, progesterone, LH, and testosterone blood levels.LH levels elevated during follicular phase in patients; estradiol levels reduced; receptor levels abnormal in endometriosis, but not in benign ovarian cysts.Hormone therapy is adequate treatment for endometriotic cysts. CA-125 is not a reliable indicator for differential diagnosis.Adding cancer antigen 125 screening to gray scale sonography for predicting specific diagnosis of benign adnexal masses in premenopausal women: is it worthwhile?The purpose of this study was to assess whether a single determination of the serum cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) level provides additional information to sonography for specific diagnosis of benign adnexal masses in premenopausal women.We conducted a retrospective study comprising 1058 premenopausal women (mean age, 34.8 years) with histologically proven benign adnexal masses. All women had undergone transvaginal sonography and serum CA-125 determination within 1 week before surgery and tumor removal. According to "pattern recognition" analysis, a presumptive diagnosis was provided on gray scale transvaginal sonography for all masses. Positive and negative likelihood ratios were calculated for gray scale sonography and gray scale sonography plus CA-125.Eighty-five women had bilateral masses (1143 masses analyzed). In 7 women with bilateral masses, the histologic diagnoses of the masses were discordant and were excluded. Histologic diagnoses were as follows: endometrioma, n = 452; dermoid cyst, n = 180; serous cyst, n = 158; hemorrhagic cyst, n = 119; mucinous cyst, n = 54; hydrosalpinx, n = 37; and other, n = 109. The median CA-125 level was significantly higher in endometrioma (71.9 IU/mL; range: 5-2620 IU/mL) and hydrosalpinx (59.2 IU/mL; range, 5-601 IU/mL) compared to all other tumor types (P < .001). The CA-125 level was 35 IU/mL or higher in 74% of endometriomas, 58% of hydrosalpinges, 34% of hemorrhagic cysts, 18% of mucinous cysts, 14% of dermoid cysts, and 8% of serous cysts. The positive and negative likelihood ratios for sonography and sonography plus CA-125 (335 IU/mL) for each kind of tumor were not statistically different except for endometrioma, for which the positive likelihood ratio for sonography plus CA-125 (55.0; 95% confidence interval, 27.5-109.9) was significantly higher than for sonography alone (19.2; 95% confidence interval, 13.6-27.1).Cancer antigen 125 screening does not add useful information for specific diagnosis of benign adnexal tumors, except for endometrioma. An elevated CA-125 level significantly increases the probability of such a lesion.History, pelvic examination findings and mobility of ovaries as a sonographic marker to detect pelvic adhesions with fixed ovaries.To compare the performance of history and examination findings combined with transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) ‘soft marker’ evaluation of ovarian mobility for the prediction of fixed ovaries secondary to endometriosis at laparoscopy.This was a prospective observational study performed at the University Gynecology unit, National Hospital of Colombo Sri Lanka. Women who were scheduled for laparoscopic assessment of their pelvis to investigate subfertility or chronic pelvic pain were enrolled. All women underwent history evaluation for dysmenorrhea and dyspareunia, vaginal examination and detailed presurgical TVS. TVS was used to assess ‘soft marker’ of ovarian mobility. ‘Fixed’ ovaries on ultrasound were defined as one or other of the ovaries being fixed or adherent to the internal iliac artery or pelvic sidewall laterally or to the uterus medially. These findings were compared with ‘fixed’ ovaries confirmed at laparoscopy.A total of 106 patients were analyzed. Mean age was 33.3 years (standard deviation, 5.1). Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values of each of the screening methods against laparoscopy in detecting endometriosis were as follows: dyspareunia, 45.9%, 76.8%, 51.5% and 72.6%; dysmenorrhea, 75.7%, 69.6%, 57.1% and 84.2%; positive vaginal examination, 73%, 88.4%, 77.1% and 85.9%; fixed ovaries with TVS, 78.4%, 94.2%, 87.9% and 89%; and a combination of history, examination findings and detection of fixed ovaries in TVS, 91.9%, 60.9%, 55.7% and 93.3%, respectively.A combination of clinical and TVS-based ‘soft marker’ of ovarian mobility provides a valid method for identifying fixed ovaries secondary to endometriosis.Dysregulated sphingolipid metabolism in endometriosis.In endometriosis, the establishment and subsistence of ectopic lesions outside the endometrium suggest an altered cellular state for pathological hyperplasia. Sphingolipids are bioactive compounds, and their biosynthesis and metabolism modulate a range of cellular processes including proliferation, migration and apoptosis. We demonstrate that aberrations in sphingolipid metabolism occur in women with endometriosis.Targeted mass spectrometry on >120 sphingolipids were measured in the sera (n = 62), peritoneal fluid (n = 63), and endometrial tissue (n = 14) of women with and without endometriosis. Quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were performed on endometrial tissues determine the expression levels of sphingolipid enzymes.Sphingolipidomics identified the in vivo accumulation of numerous sphingolipids, including the functionally antagonistic glucosylceramides and ceramides in the serum and PF of women with endometriosis. We found upregulation of specific sphingolipid enzymes, namely sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SMS1), sphingomyelinase 3 (SMPD3), and glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) in the endometrium of endometriotic women with corresponding increased GlcCer, decreased sphingomyelin levels, and decreased apoptosis in the endometrium.Our sphingolipidomics approach provided evidence of altered sphingolipid metabolism flux in serum, peritoneal fluid, and endometrial tissue in women with endometriosis. The results provide new information on how sphingolipids and eutopic endometrium may contribute to the pathophysiology of endometriosis. The results also have implications for the use of sphingolipids as potential biomarkers.Development of a nonsurgical diagnostic tool for endometriosis based on the detection of endometrial leukocyte subsets and serum CA-125 levels.To determine whether the proportion of several leukocyte subsets is modulated in the endometrium of patients with endometriosis and, if yes, whether it can be used for diagnostic purposes.Case-control study.Eight clinical institutions of the Montreal area.Women who underwent laparoscopy or laparotomy between 1997 and 2001, who had regular menstrual cycles and were not under hormone treatment for the previous 3 months were selected. This study included 368 women, 173 with surgically confirmed endometriosis and 195 controls with no surgical evidence of endometriosis.Evaluation of selected angiogenic and inflammatory markers in endometriosis before and after danazol treatment.Angiogenesis and inflammation are pivotal processes in developing endometriosis in the peritoneal cavity. The aim of the present study was to evaluate these two processes in women with endometriosis who had been treated with danazol to determine the sensitivity of a non-invasive test in diagnosing endometriosis. The clinical follow-up study was conducted in a group of 103 women diagnosed laparoscopically with endometriosis. Thirty-five patients qualified for danazol treatment. Pain was assessed using a visual analogue scale, whereas endometriosis was assessed using the revised American Society of Reproductive Medicine (rASRM) scale. Cancer antigen (CA)-125 and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentrations in plasma and peritoneal fluid were determined by immunoenzymatic methods, whereas vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin (IL)-1β concentrations in plasma and peritoneal fluid were determined by ELISA. Endometrial expression of IL-8 and platelet-derived growth factor alpha polypeptide (PDGF-A) was determined using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Women with endometriosis (68.9% of patients) had higher plasma concentrations of CA-125, as well as higher concentrations of both CA-125 and VEGF in the peritoneal fluid. Endometrial expression of IL-8 mRNA was significantly higher, whereas that of PDGF-A was significantly lower, in contrast. After danazol treatment the patients reported lower pain scores; in addition, CA-125 concentrations in the plasma were decreased (P<0.001), whereas VEGF concentration in the plasma increased (P=0.009). For the diagnosis of endometriosis, none of the combinations of given markers had a sensitivity >60%. Danazol treatment is highly effective in relieving pain and decreasing CA-125 concentrations in the plasma. Higher plasma concentrations of VEGF after treatment could imply stimulation of angiogenesis. Diagnosis of deep endometriosis by clinical examination during menstruation and plasma CA-125 concentration.To evaluate a clinical examination during menstruation and plasma CA-125 concentrations to diagnose deep endometriosis.Prospective study in 61 women scheduled for a laparoscopy, a retrospective study in 140 women with deep endometriosis, and a clinical validation study in 16 women with painful pelvic nodularities during menstruation.University Hospital Gasthuisberg, a tertiary referral center.In the retrospective study, deep endometriosis was detected by routine clinical examination in only 36% of women. Lesions infiltrating deeper than 15 mm were detected in 50%. In the prospective study pelvic nodularities were detected by routine clinical examination in 4 women but were detected in 22 by clinical examination during menstruation. The latter was highly reliable to diagnose deep endometriosis, cystic ovarian endometriosis, and cul-de-sac obliteration. CA-125 concentrations were higher during menstruation and correlated with deep endometriosis and with deep and cystic ovarian endometriosis. Nodularities at clinical examination or follicular phase CA-125 concentrations > 35 U/mL are useful to decide that a bowel preparation should be given, achieving a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 83%. In the clinical validation study, deep endometriosis was found in 14 of 16 women.Clinical examination during menstruation can diagnose reliably deep endometriosis, cystic ovarian endometriosis, or cul-de-sac adhesions. This test, preferentially combined with a follicular phase CA-125 assay, should be used to decide whether a preparation for bowel surgery should be given.Tumor markers and transvaginal ultrasonography in the diagnosis of endometrioma.To evaluate the accuracy of CA 19.9 plasma levels (with or without CA 125 levels) combined with transvaginal ultrasonography in the differential diagnosis of endometrioma.One hundred eighteen consecutive premenopausal nonpregnant women had laparoscopy or laparotomy between November 1994 and November 1995 because of the presence of a persistent adnexal mass. They underwent transvaginal ultrasonography and measurement of CA 19.9 and CA 125 plasma levels within 2 days before surgery. The ultrasonographic impression and the tumor marker values were compared with the histopathologic diagnosis. The overall agreement between the test result and the actual outcome was calculated using the kappa statistic.Transvaginal ultrasonography had a strong agreement between test result and surgery (kappa value 0.84), whereas the combined methods were associated with a lower kappa value (range 0.24-0.80).Transvaginal ultrasonography used alone is the most cost-effective method in the preoperative differential diagnosis of endometrioma.A predictive model for endometriosis.Aromatase is the key enzyme in the process of estrogen biosynthesis from the precursor androgen. Recently, aromatase has been found to be aberrantly expressed in eutopic endometrium of patients suffering from endometriosis. This finding has prompted speculation about the contribution of this enzyme to the prediction of this disease.We prospectively aimed to evaluate whether endometrial biopsy, prior to laparoscopy in symptomatic women to screen for the presence of aromatase by real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, combined with select patients' characteristics, is of value to predict endometriosis.Of 48 consecutive symptomatic and eligible patients, 25 (52.1%) exhibited endometriosis and 23 (47.9%) were disease-free. A multiple logistic regression model revealed that 95.5% of patients whose eutopic endometrium was found to be positive for aromatase mRNA as well as immunohistochemically detected protein and who were additionally suffering from moderate to severe dysmenorrhoea (visual analogue scale score >4/10) exhibited endometriosis at laparoscopy.These findings provide direct evidence that screening for eutopic endometrial aromatase in combination with clinical data could be of discriminative value in the prediction of disease.Validation study of nonsurgical diagnosis of endometriosis.To determine whether the surgical diagnosis of endometriosis can be predicted using symptoms, signs, and ultrasound findings.Prospective study (study sample); retrospective record review (test sample).Hospital of Desio (study sample) and Mangiagalli Hospital (test sample), Italy.Ninety women scheduled to undergo laparoscopy or laparotomy (study sample); 120 women who underwent laparoscopy (test sample).The study sample group was interviewed before surgery about infertility and dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and noncyclic pelvic pain and each member had a pelvic examination and a transvaginal ultrasound. At surgery, endometriosis was noted. For the test sample, the same information was abstracted from medical records after laparoscopy.The ability of symptoms, signs, and ultrasound to predict endometriosis at surgery. A classification tree was developed with the study sample and evaluated with the test sample.Ovarian endometriosis, but not nonovarian endometriosis, could be reliably predicted with noninvasive tools. Ultrasound and examination best predicted ovarian endometriosis, correctly classifying 100% of cases with no false positive diagnoses in the study sample. Similar results were found in the test sample.Noninvasive tools may be used to identify women with ovarian, but not nonovarian endometriosis, with excellent agreement with surgical diagnosis.Evaluation of elevated urinary enolase I levels in patients with endometriosis.The aim of this study is to validate and investigate the clinical value of urinary enolase I in patients with endometriosis.Urine samples of 39 patients with histologically confirmed endometriosis and 20 patients without endometriosis were collected. Western blot analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to detect the increase of enolase I in patients' urine.Urinary enolase I expression corrected for creatinine ratio (non neuronal enolase (NNE)-Cr) was significantly greater in patients with endometriosis (p = 0.026). When the diagnostic performance of NNE-Cr was evaluated with serum CA-125 combination, the area under the curve was 0.821 (95% confidence interval 0.713-0.928) with sensitivity and specificity of 76.9% and 85.0%, respectively.Elevated urinary enolase I, in conjunction with serum CA-125, may be used as a potential biomarker for endometriosis.Urinary vitamin D-binding protein is elevated in patients with endometriosis.Recently, proteomic technologies have demonstrated that several proteins are differently expressed in various body fluids of patients with endometriosis compared with those without this condition. The aim of this study was to investigate proteins secreted in urine of patients with endometriosis using proteomic techniques in order to identify potential markers for the clinical diagnosis of endometriosis.Urine samples were collected from women undergoing laparoscopy for different indications including pelvic masses, pelvic pain, suspicious endometriosis, infertility and diagnostic evaluation. Proteomic techniques and mass spectrometry were used to identify proteins secreted in the urine of the patients with and without endometriosis and quantification of identified protein was performed using western blot and specific commercial sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA).Twenty-two protein spots were differentially expressed in the urine of patients with and without endometriosis, one of which was identified as urinary vitamin D-binding protein (VDBP). ELISA quantification of urinary VDBP corrected for creatinine expression (VDBP-Cr) revealed that urinary VDBP-Cr was significantly greater in patients with endometriosis than in those without (111.96 ± 74.59 versus 69.90 ± 43.76 ng/mg Cr, P = 0.001). VDBP-Cr had limited value as a diagnostic marker for endometriosis (Sensitivity 58%, Specificity 76%). When combined with serum CA-125 levels (the product of serum CA-125 and urinary VDBP-Cr), it did not significantly increase the diagnostic power of serum CA-125 alone.Urinary VDBP levels are elevated in patients with endometriosis. They have limited value as a potential diagnostic biomarker for endometriosis but suggest it would be worthwhile to investigate other urinary proteins for this purpose.Combination of non-invasive and semi-invasive tests for diagnosis of minimal to mild endometriosis.Non-surgical diagnostic approach for endometriosis would be of great gain to both physicians and patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the diagnostic value of serum measurement of IL-6 combined with the presence of nerve fibres in the functional layer of endometrium for diagnosis of minimal-mild endometriosis.In this prospective study 114 women who underwent laparoscopy for infertility and/or pelvic pain were divided into two groups: control cases (40 cases) with no pathologic findings; and endometriosis patients (74 cases) [subdivided into stages 1-2 or minimal-mild (MM) and stages 3-4 or moderate-severe cases]. Blood was drawn one day before laparoscopy and stored for subsequent analysis of IL-6. Endometrial biopsy was obtained prior to laparoscopy and Immunohistochemistry was performed using the pan-neuronal marker protein gene product 9.5(PGP9.5). Then laparoscopic diagnosis of endometriosis confirmed by histopathology was done.Serum IL-6 with a threshold of 15.4 pg/ml was found to be able to diagnose MM endometriosis with 89.5 % sensitivity and 82.5 % specificity, but sensitivity and specificity of presence of nerve fibres in the functional layer of endometrium were 92 % and 80 % respectively. When two diagnostic modalities were combined the sensitivity and specificity were raised to 100 and 92.5 % respectively.Combination of both serum IL-6 and presence of nerve fibres in the endometrium is more reliable method for diagnosis of MM endometriosis than in single test.Transvaginal ultrasound and computed tomography combined with clinical parameters and CA-125 determinations in the differential diagnosis of persistent ovarian cysts in premenopausal women.The purpose of this prospective study was to compare the accuracy of computed tomography (CT) and transvaginal ultrasonography in the differential diagnosis of persistent cystic ovarian lesions. The candidates for this study were 161 premenopausal non-pregnant women with an adnexal mass. After a 3-month follow-up, 83 masses persisted and were examined by both techniques before surgery. We also evaluated the CA-125 plasma levels. The CT and ultrasonographic diagnoses were then compared with the histopathological diagnosis. The overall agreement between the test results and the actual outcome was calculated by means of the kappa statistic. Transvaginal ultrasonography has a closer accuracy in the diagnosis of serous cysts and serous cystadenoma, ovarian carcinoma and endometrioma (value of kappa: 0.78, 0.73 and 0.80, respectively) than CT, even if the latter is associated with clinical and biochemical parameters such as patient's age and CA-125 plasma levels. Only in the diagnosis of cystic teratoma, is transvaginal ultrasonography less accurate than CT. In conclusion, in premenopausal women, transvaginal ultrasonography remains a cost-effective method in the diagnosis of most cystic ovarian lesions.[Diagnostic value of the detection of aromatase cytochrome P450 and CA125 for endometriosis].To evaluate the diagnostic value of examining endometrial biopsy specimens for aromatase cytochrome P450 and CA125 for endometriosis.The expression of aromatase cytochrome P450 in endometrium was detected by immunohistochemical analysis for 36 endometriosis women and 22 non-endometriosis but subfertility or pelvic pain women served as controls; the serum CA125 levels were measured by chemical radiation method.By measuring serum CA125, the sensitivity of the serum CA125 assay was 44%, the specificity was 82%, the positive predictive value was 80%, and the negative predictive value was 47%; the sensitivity of aromatase cytochrome P450 in biopsy endometrium of endometriosis was 82%, the specificity was 59%, the positive predictive value was 76%, and the negative predictive value was 67%.The combination assay of aromatase cytochrome P450 in eutopic endometrium and CA125 can be used as a diagnostic test for endometriosis, especially for the early stage of endometriosis, which is superior to the assay of CA125.Evaluation of serum and urinary angiogenic factors in patients with endometriosis.The aim of this study was to evaluate serum and urinary levels of vascular endothelial growth factors, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase (sFlt-1) in patients with endometriosis.During surgery for pelvic pain, pelvic mass or infertility, serum and urine were collected. Of 70 patients, 46 had histology-proven endometriosis and 24 patients without endometriosis participated as controls.Serum TNF-alpha levels and urinary sFlt-1 levels corrected for creatinine excretion were significantly increased in the endometriosis group (P=0.001 and P=0.011 respectively). Serum sFlt-1 levels and urinary sFlt-1 levels corrected for creatinine were significantly higher in patients with minimal-to-mild disease (P=0.014 and P=0.015 respectively), where serum TNF-alpha levels were increased in moderate-to-severe endometriosis (P<0.001).The pathogenesis of minimal-to-mild endometriosis and moderate-to-severe endometriosis seems to be different. Increased sFlt-1 levels in serum and urine of minimal-to-mild disease indicate that sFlt-1 may have an important role in inhibiting angiogenic process of the disease.Autoimmune phenomena in infertile patients with endometriosis.To assess the presence of autoimmune factors in patients with endometriosis, endometrial homogenates, peritoneal fluid, and serum were evaluated in 23 patients with endometriosis and 22 control subjects. The methods used were Ouchterlony immunodiffusion, immunoelectrophoresis, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, and radial immunodiffusion. The study demonstrated precipitation lines between endometrial homogenates and serum from some endometriosis patients but not from the control subjects. Immunoelectrophoresis demonstrated precipitation lines at beta-globulin position when endometrial homogenates were used against serum of patients with endometriosis and with goat antihuman serum. It is suggested that an antigen, possibly a glycoprotein, is present in the endometrial homogenates. Radial immunodiffusion studies for immunoglobulins (Ig) G, A, and M and complement components C3c and C4 showed significantly higher concentrations of C3c and C4 in serum and peritoneal fluid of patients with endometriosis than the control subjects (P less than .05). There was no significant difference in concentration of IgG, A, M, factor B, and properdin.Patients with endometriosis of the rectosigmoid have a higher percentage of natural killer cells in peripheral blood.To estimate the concentration of natural killer (NK) cells in the peripheral blood in patients with and without endometriosis.Case-control study (Canadian Task Force classification II-2).Tertiary referral hospital.One hundred fifty-five patients who had undergone videolaparoscopy were divided into 2 groups: those with endometriosis (n = 100) and those without endometriosis (n = 55).The percentage of NK cells relative to peripheral lymphocytes was quantified at flow cytometry in 155 patients who had undergone laparoscopy. In addition to verifying the presence of endometriosis, stage of disease and the sites affected were also evaluated.The mean (SD) percentage of NK cells was higher (15.3% [9.8%]) in patients with endometriosis than in the group without the disease (10.6% [5.8%]) (p < .001). The percentage of NK cells was highest (19.8 [10.3%]) in patients with advanced stages of endometriosis and in those in whom the rectosigmoid colon was affected. In a statistical model of probability, the association of this marker (NK cells ≥11%) with the presence of symptoms such as pain and intestinal bleeding during menstruation and the absence of previous pregnancy yielded a 78% likelihood of the rectosigmoid colon being affected.Compared with patients without endometriosis, those with endometriosis demonstrate a higher concentration of peripheral NK cells. The percentage of NK cells is greater, primarily in patients with advanced stages of endometriosis involving the rectosigmoid colon. Therefore, it may serve as a diagnostic marker for this type of severe endometriosis, in particular if considered in conjunction with the symptoms.Transvaginal ultrasonography combined with CA-125 plasma levels in the diagnosis of endometrioma.To assess the role of transvaginal ultrasonography combined with CA-125 plasma levels in the diagnosis of endometrioma.Prospective study with pathological confirmation of the diagnosis.Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of the University of Cagliari, Italy.One hundred one consecutive premenopausal nonpregnant women submitted to laparoscopy or laparotomy, from November 1993 to October 1994, because of the presence of an adnexal mass.Within 2 days before surgery all patients underwent transvaginal ultrasonography and evaluation of CA-125 plasma levels. The ultrasonographic impression and the CA-125 value were then compared with the histopathological diagnosis.The overall agreement between the test result and the actual outcome was calculated using the kappa index for the transvaginal ultrasonography used alone and for the combination of transvaginal ultrasonography and CA-125 values, for each chosen cutoff and range.Transvaginal ultrasonography has a strong agreement between test and surgery (kappa value 0.76) whereas the combined use of the two methods is associated with a lower kappa index, ranging from 0.40 to 0.69.Transvaginal ultrasonography used alone has a better predictive capacity in differentiating endometrioma from other adnexal masses than combined methods.Comparison of transvaginal sonography and bimanual pelvic examination in patients with laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis.To determine the usefulness of noninvasive clinical tests to diagnose symptomatic endometriosis, we retrospectively reviewed the medical records of 91 patients with chronic pelvic pain and laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis. Thirty-seven women (41%) had pelvic peritoneal endometrial implants with adhesions; in 44 (48%) the ovaries were also affected, and in 10 (11%) the disease involved both the uterus and ovaries. Seventy-nine (87%) women had dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, or both. Forty-three (47%) had a normal bimanual pelvic examination and 37 (41%) an unremarkable transvaginal sonographic evaluation (no significant difference). The women were divided into two groups: group 1, in whom the disease extended to the ovaries and uterus, and group 2, those in whom only peritoneal implants and adhesions were present. In group 1, 48 women (89%) had an abnormal ultrasonographic evaluation compared with only 4 (11%) in group 2 (p <0.001). Our findings indicate that bimanual pelvic examination and transvaginal sonography are equally accurate in detecting endometriosis; however, when the uterine surface and ovaries are involved, the latter is more informative. Therefore, patients with chronic pelvic pain, especially pain related to menstruation or coitus, should be evaluated laparoscopically to diagnose mild endometriosis adequately.Transvaginal ultrasonography combined with pelvic examination in the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma.The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy of TVS and TVS combined with pelvic examination for the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma. Three hundred and five ovarian masses of 244 patients with either pre-operative or post-operative diagnosis of ovarian tumor and received TVS between January 1, 1996 and December 31, 1998 were included in the study. Of 305 masses, 221 endometriomas of 164 patients were diagnosed histologically. The efficacy of TVS was 84.9 per cent with a sensitivity of 92.3 per cent and specificity of 70.2 per cent. LR+ and LR- were 3.1 and 0.1 respectively. The combination of TVS and pelvic examination with either positive test had a higher sensitivity (98.8%) but lower specificity (26.6%). This combination dramatically improved NPV (97.5%) and LR- (0.05), whereas, the combination with both positive tests had a sensitivity of 78.1 per cent, and specificity of 81.5 per cent. LR+ and LR- were not different from those using TVS alone. In conclusion, the study has shown the role of TVS in the diagnosis of ovarian endometrioma. The combination of TVS and pelvic examination may be useful in ruling out the disease. However, a further prospective study should be performed to confirm the efficacy of the combination.Cytokeratin-19 as a biomarker in urine and in serum for the diagnosis of endometriosis--a prospective study.Endometriosis compromises the quality of life of countless women worldwide and is a leading cause of disability. Clinical symptoms of endometriosis can be very heterogeneous leading to a long interval between onset of symptoms and surgical diagnosis. A noninvasive, rapid diagnostic test is urgently needed. In this prospective study, we evaluated the usefulness of Cytokeratin-19 (CK19) as a biomarker for the diagnosis of endometriosis through urine and serum ELISA. 76 reproductive-aged women undergoing laparoscopy for benign conditions were included to this study and divided into two groups by the presence (n = 44) or absence (n = 32) of endometriosis. There was no statistically significant correlation between the concentration of CK19 in urine (p = 0.51) or in serum (p = 0.77) and the diagnosis of endometriosis. Assigning the samples to the proliferative or secretory cycle stage did not sufficiently lower the p values. In this study, the promising data reported in the recent literature about CK19 serving as a sufficient biomarker for endometriosis could not be verified when tested in a larger sample size. Further studies are warranted to explore the usefulness of CK19 in the diagnosis of endometriosis.CA 125 in serum, peritoneal fluid, active lesions, and endometrium of patients with endometriosis.Ca 125 levels in serum and peritoneal fluid were measured in 39 patients with endometriosis and 18 patients with normal pelvic anatomy at laparoscopy, and the presence of this antigen in endometriotic tissue and endometrial mucosa was also investigated. Serum CA 125 concentrations were elevated in patients with Stage III or IV endometriosis compared with control subjects (32.9 +/- 11.2 versus 16.4 +/- 8.9 U/ml, means +/- SD; p less than 0.001). CA 125 values were greater than 35 U/ml in 36.8% of women with Stage III or IV endometriosis and in none of the control subjects. No significant differences in CA 125 levels in peritoneal fluid were found between patients with endometriosis and control subjects. The immunohistochemical studies found CA 125 in 10% of the endometriotic lesions and 37.5% of the endometrial samples of patients with endometriosis and in 33.3% of the endometrial samples of control subjects.Hormonal and immunologic methods in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with benign ovarian tumors and endometriotic cysts.To compare efficacy of various methods for characterizing endometriosis and benign ovarian tumors.Two parallel groups of patients, 54 with endometriotic ovarian cysts and 48 with benign tumors.Central clinic.Patients referred from all regions over a 5-year period.Estrogen Estrogen and progesterone receptor levels of endometrium and endometriotic foci, CA-125 concentration, and estradiol, progesterone, LH, and testosterone blood levels.LH levels elevated during follicular phase in patients; estradiol levels reduced; receptor levels abnormal in endometriosis, but not in benign ovarian cysts.Hormone therapy is adequate treatment for endometriotic cysts. CA-125 is not a reliable indicator for differential diagnosis.Adding cancer antigen 125 screening to gray scale sonography for predicting specific diagnosis of benign adnexal masses in premenopausal women: is it worthwhile?The purpose of this study was to assess whether a single determination of the serum cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) level provides additional information to sonography for specific diagnosis of benign adnexal masses in premenopausal women.We conducted a retrospective study comprising 1058 premenopausal women (mean age, 34.8 years) with histologically proven benign adnexal masses. All women had undergone transvaginal sonography and serum CA-125 determination within 1 week before surgery and tumor removal. According to "pattern recognition" analysis, a presumptive diagnosis was provided on gray scale transvaginal sonography for all masses. Positive and negative likelihood ratios were calculated for gray scale sonography and gray scale sonography plus CA-125.Eighty-five women had bilateral masses (1143 masses analyzed). In 7 women with bilateral masses, the histologic diagnoses of the masses were discordant and were excluded. Histologic diagnoses were as follows: endometrioma, n = 452; dermoid cyst, n = 180; serous cyst, n = 158; hemorrhagic cyst, n = 119; mucinous cyst, n = 54; hydrosalpinx, n = 37; and other, n = 109. The median CA-125 level was significantly higher in endometrioma (71.9 IU/mL; range: 5-2620 IU/mL) and hydrosalpinx (59.2 IU/mL; range, 5-601 IU/mL) compared to all other tumor types (P < .001). The CA-125 level was 35 IU/mL or higher in 74% of endometriomas, 58% of hydrosalpinges, 34% of hemorrhagic cysts, 18% of mucinous cysts, 14% of dermoid cysts, and 8% of serous cysts. The positive and negative likelihood ratios for sonography and sonography plus CA-125 (335 IU/mL) for each kind of tumor were not statistically different except for endometrioma, for which the positive likelihood ratio for sonography plus CA-125 (55.0; 95% confidence interval, 27.5-109.9) was significantly higher than for sonography alone (19.2; 95% confidence interval, 13.6-27.1).Cancer antigen 125 screening does not add useful information for specific diagnosis of benign adnexal tumors, except for endometrioma. An elevated CA-125 level significantly increases the probability of such a lesion.History, pelvic examination findings and mobility of ovaries as a sonographic marker to detect pelvic adhesions with fixed ovaries.To compare the performance of history and examination findings combined with transvaginal ultrasound (TVS) ‘soft marker’ evaluation of ovarian mobility for the prediction of fixed ovaries secondary to endometriosis at laparoscopy.This was a prospective observational study performed at the University Gynecology unit, National Hospital of Colombo Sri Lanka. Women who were scheduled for laparoscopic assessment of their pelvis to investigate subfertility or chronic pelvic pain were enrolled. All women underwent history evaluation for dysmenorrhea and dyspareunia, vaginal examination and detailed presurgical TVS. TVS was used to assess ‘soft marker’ of ovarian mobility. ‘Fixed’ ovaries on ultrasound were defined as one or other of the ovaries being fixed or adherent to the internal iliac artery or pelvic sidewall laterally or to the uterus medially. These findings were compared with ‘fixed’ ovaries confirmed at laparoscopy.A total of 106 patients were analyzed. Mean age was 33.3 years (standard deviation, 5.1). Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values of each of the screening methods against laparoscopy in detecting endometriosis were as follows: dyspareunia, 45.9%, 76.8%, 51.5% and 72.6%; dysmenorrhea, 75.7%, 69.6%, 57.1% and 84.2%; positive vaginal examination, 73%, 88.4%, 77.1% and 85.9%; fixed ovaries with TVS, 78.4%, 94.2%, 87.9% and 89%; and a combination of history, examination findings and detection of fixed ovaries in TVS, 91.9%, 60.9%, 55.7% and 93.3%, respectively.A combination of clinical and TVS-based ‘soft marker’ of ovarian mobility provides a valid method for identifying fixed ovaries secondary to endometriosis.Dysregulated sphingolipid metabolism in endometriosis.In endometriosis, the establishment and subsistence of ectopic lesions outside the endometrium suggest an altered cellular state for pathological hyperplasia. Sphingolipids are bioactive compounds, and their biosynthesis and metabolism modulate a range of cellular processes including proliferation, migration and apoptosis. We demonstrate that aberrations in sphingolipid metabolism occur in women with endometriosis.Targeted mass spectrometry on >120 sphingolipids were measured in the sera (n = 62), peritoneal fluid (n = 63), and endometrial tissue (n = 14) of women with and without endometriosis. Quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were performed on endometrial tissues determine the expression levels of sphingolipid enzymes.Sphingolipidomics identified the in vivo accumulation of numerous sphingolipids, including the functionally antagonistic glucosylceramides and ceramides in the serum and PF of women with endometriosis. We found upregulation of specific sphingolipid enzymes, namely sphingomyelin synthase 1 (SMS1), sphingomyelinase 3 (SMPD3), and glucosylceramide synthase (GCS) in the endometrium of endometriotic women with corresponding increased GlcCer, decreased sphingomyelin levels, and decreased apoptosis in the endometrium.Our sphingolipidomics approach provided evidence of altered sphingolipid metabolism flux in serum, peritoneal fluid, and endometrial tissue in women with endometriosis. The results provide new information on how sphingolipids and eutopic endometrium may contribute to the pathophysiology of endometriosis. The results also have implications for the use of sphingolipids as potential biomarkers.Development of a nonsurgical diagnostic tool for endometriosis based on the detection of endometrial leukocyte subsets and serum CA-125 levels.To determine whether the proportion of several leukocyte subsets is modulated in the endometrium of patients with endometriosis and, if yes, whether it can be used for diagnostic purposes.Case-control study.Eight clinical institutions of the Montreal area.Women who underwent laparoscopy or laparotomy between 1997 and 2001, who had regular menstrual cycles and were not under hormone treatment for the previous 3 months were selected. This study included 368 women, 173 with surgically confirmed endometriosis and 195 controls with no surgical evidence of endometriosis.Evaluation of selected angiogenic and inflammatory markers in endometriosis before and after danazol treatment.Angiogenesis and inflammation are pivotal processes in developing endometriosis in the peritoneal cavity. The aim of the present study was to evaluate these two processes in women with endometriosis who had been treated with danazol to determine the sensitivity of a non-invasive test in diagnosing endometriosis. The clinical follow-up study was conducted in a group of 103 women diagnosed laparoscopically with endometriosis. Thirty-five patients qualified for danazol treatment. Pain was assessed using a visual analogue scale, whereas endometriosis was assessed using the revised American Society of Reproductive Medicine (rASRM) scale. Cancer antigen (CA)-125 and C-reactive protein (CRP) concentrations in plasma and peritoneal fluid were determined by immunoenzymatic methods, whereas vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin (IL)-1β concentrations in plasma and peritoneal fluid were determined by ELISA. Endometrial expression of IL-8 and platelet-derived growth factor alpha polypeptide (PDGF-A) was determined using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Women with endometriosis (68.9% of patients) had higher plasma concentrations of CA-125, as well as higher concentrations of both CA-125 and VEGF in the peritoneal fluid. Endometrial expression of IL-8 mRNA was significantly higher, whereas that of PDGF-A was significantly lower, in contrast. After danazol treatment the patients reported lower pain scores; in addition, CA-125 concentrations in the plasma were decreased (P<0.001), whereas VEGF concentration in the plasma increased (P=0.009). For the diagnosis of endometriosis, none of the combinations of given markers had a sensitivity >60%. Danazol treatment is highly effective in relieving pain and decreasing CA-125 concentrations in the plasma. Higher plasma concentrations of VEGF after treatment could imply stimulation of angiogenesis. Diagnosis of deep endometriosis by clinical examination during menstruation and plasma CA-125 concentration.To evaluate a clinical examination during menstruation and plasma CA-125 concentrations to diagnose deep endometriosis.Prospective study in 61 women scheduled for a laparoscopy, a retrospective study in 140 women with deep endometriosis, and a clinical validation study in 16 women with painful pelvic nodularities during menstruation.University Hospital Gasthuisberg, a tertiary referral center.In the retrospective study, deep endometriosis was detected by routine clinical examination in only 36% of women. Lesions infiltrating deeper than 15 mm were detected in 50%. In the prospective study pelvic nodularities were detected by routine clinical examination in 4 women but were detected in 22 by clinical examination during menstruation. The latter was highly reliable to diagnose deep endometriosis, cystic ovarian endometriosis, and cul-de-sac obliteration. CA-125 concentrations were higher during menstruation and correlated with deep endometriosis and with deep and cystic ovarian endometriosis. Nodularities at clinical examination or follicular phase CA-125 concentrations > 35 U/mL are useful to decide that a bowel preparation should be given, achieving a sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 83%. In the clinical validation study, deep endometriosis was found in 14 of 16 women.Clinical examination during menstruation can diagnose reliably deep endometriosis, cystic ovarian endometriosis, or cul-de-sac adhesions. This test, preferentially combined with a follicular phase CA-125 assay, should be used to decide whether a preparation for bowel surgery should be given.