Development and evaluation of a nurse-led transient elastography service for the staging of hepatic fibrosis in patients with suspected chronic liver disease.Establishing the presence of fibrosis and cirrhosis is an essential step in the management of patients with chronic liver diseases (CLD). Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) based on transient elastography (TE) correlates well with the stages of liver fibrosis and has been developed as a non-invasive alternative to liver biopsy. The studies performed to date have used physician operators. With the potential use of TE for screening of community-based populations for liver disease, we aimed to evaluate the performance of nurse operators.Retrospective analysis.We reviewed the reliability and accuracy of LSMs performed by the nurse-led TE service at Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham between May 2009 and January 2011. Consecutive patients with suspected CLD who underwent LSM were included.Over the study period 585 LSMs were performed. Analysis was performed on the 208 patients where LSM could be compared with liver biopsy findings. Of these 11 (5.3%) had unreliable LSM results (less than 10 valid shots or success rate <60%). There were no LSM failures. Inadequate liver biopsy specimen led to exclusion in 26 (12.5%) patients. For the detection of significant fibrosis (Ishak stage >2), a sensitivity of 0.78 and specificity of 0.81 was obtained, with a cut-off value of 8 kPa. Using a cut-off value of 13 kPa for detection of cirrhosis, a sensitivity and specificity of 0.8 and 0.92 was obtained.We have demonstrated that a nurse-led TE service can produce a low level of unreliable results and LSM failures, with comparable sensitivity and specificity for detecting significant fibrosis and cirrhosis to those reported in the literature. The demands on the use of TE could potentially be eased through the introduction of nurse-led service delivery.Transient elastography accurately predicts presence of significant portal hypertension in patients with chronic liver disease.Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is a prognostic marker in patients with cirrhosis. Transient elastography measures liver stiffness (LS).To assess the correlation between LS and HVPG and to investigate the performance of transient elastography for the diagnosis of significant portal hypertension (PHT).Liver stiffness was measured by Fibroscan in 150 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy with haemodynamic measurements. Usual clinical and biological data were collected. Significant PHT was defined as a HVPG > or = 10 mmHg.Hepatic venous pressure gradient was found to be > or = 10 mmHg in 76 patients. Cirrhosis was diagnosed in 89 patients. HVPG was found to be correlated with: LS (rho = 0.858; P < 0.001) and inversely correlated with prothrombin index (rho = -0.718; P < 0.001). Regarding significant PHT, AUROC for LS and prothrombin index were 0.945 [0.904-0.987] and 0.892 [0.837-0.947] respectively. The cut-off value of 21 kPa accurately predicted significant PHT in 92% of the 144 patients for whom LS was successful.Liver stiffness measurement is correlated with HVPG and transient elastography identifies patients with significant PHT.ARFI, FibroScan, ELF, and their combinations in the assessment of liver fibrosis: a prospective study.Our aim was to evaluate a serologic marker (ELF) and two ultrasound-based methods (FibroScan and ARFI), as well as their combinations, in the assessment of liver fibrosis.One-hundred and forty-six patients (87 liver transplant recipients, 59 non-transplant patients) who underwent liver biopsy were prospectively included. We evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of FibroScan, ARFI, ELF and the combination of ELF with either ARFI or FibroScan. After analyzing in separate transplant and non-transplant patients, the whole cohort was divided into a training set and a validation set.ARFI imaging was successfully performed across the whole cohort, while FibroScan failed in 16 (11%) patients. The three methods showed similar AUROCs and best cut-off values in transplant and non-transplant patients. In the training set, differences between the AUROCs of ARFI, FibroScan and ELF to diagnose F⩾2 (0.879, 0.861, and 0.764, respectively) and cirrhosis (0.936, 0.918, and 0.841) were not statistically significant, although both ultrasound-based methods showed higher accuracy than ELF. The combination of ELF with ARFI or FibroScan increased the negative and positive predictive values of single tests for the diagnosis of F ≥ 2 and cirrhosis. Similar results were obtained when the methods were tested in the validation set.ARFI is as effective as either FibroScan or ELF in the non-invasive assessment of liver fibrosis, and its inclusion in an ultrasound device could facilitate its incorporation into routine clinical practice. The combination of ARFI or FibroScan with ELF may help better identify patients with or without significant fibrosis or cirrhosis.Transient elastography: a valid alternative to biopsy in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography is a novel and non-invasive technique for the evaluation of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. Few studies that exist value the efficacy of transient elastography, mainly in hepatitis C virus-infected patients.To evaluate the effectiveness, objectivity, reproducibility and safety of this technique.We included 103 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy in the last 48 months with a wide spectrum of chronic liver diseases. Median stiffness value (expressed as kilopascals - kPa) was kept as representative of the liver elastic modulus. All biopsy specimens were analysed by the same pathologist according to the METAVIR scoring system.Median value of stiffness in patients with mild or moderate fibrosis (FI and FII), and severe fibrosis or cirrhosis (FIII and FIV) was of 7, 4 +/- 5 and 16, 4 +/- 10 kPa, respectively, with a significant difference between them (P < 0.05). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves showed the optimal liver stiffness cut-off values for each group.We found a positive correlation between the liver stiffness found by transient elastography and fibrosis stage on biopsy in all patients, independently of the liver disease aetiology. Transient elastography is an easy, quick to perform and safe non-invasive procedure, reliable for assessing liver fibrosis.[Elastography--a new tool for diagnosis of chronic liver diseases. Might replace liver biopsy, but not always].Transient elastography as a screening tool for liver fibrosis and cirrhosis in a community-based population aged over 45 years.Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) has been used to measure fibrosis in patients with various types of chronic liver diseases. However, its usefulness as a screening procedure in apparently healthy people had not been evaluated to date.1358 subjects >45 years old from a general population attending for a medical check-up were consecutively enrolled in the study. All subjects were submitted to medical examination and laboratory tests in addition to LSM, performed on the same day by a single operator. Subjects with LSM values >8 kPa were referred to a liver unit for further investigations.168 subjects were not considered for analysis due to missing data (n=23), LSM failure (n=51) or unreliable LSM values (n=94). Among the 1190 remaining subjects, 89 (7.5%) had LSM >8 kPa including nine patients with LSM >13 kPa. Despite the fact that normal liver tests were observed in 43% of them (38 out of 89), a specific cause of chronic liver disease was found in all cases. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) was the likely cause of chronic liver disease in 52 patients, alcoholic liver disease (ALD) in 20, and both causes were associated in seven additional patients. Hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus chronic hepatitis was documented in five and four cases, respectively, and primary biliary cirrhosis in one. Liver biopsy was obtained for 27 patients, including the nine patients with LSM >13 kPa, who were diagnosed with liver cirrhosis due to ALD (n=5), chronic hepatitis C (n=3) or chronic hepatitis B (n=1). The 18 remaining biopsies showed liver fibrosis in all cases except one (isolated steatosis), with ALD and NAFLD being present in six and eight cases, respectively.LSM proved to be a useful and specific procedure to screen for cirrhosis in the general population and to detect undiagnosed chronic liver disease in apparently healthy subjects.Evaluation of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging for determination of liver stiffness using transient elastography as a reference.To evaluate cut-off values and performance of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI) using transient elastography [FibroScan© (FS)] as a reference.Six hundred and six patients were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent liver stiffness measurement with FS (FS-LS) and ARFI (with shear wave velocity quantification; ARFI-SWV) and the performance of ARFI in comparison to FS was determined. Sixty-eight patients underwent liver biopsy.Significantly higher success rates for the determination of liver stiffness were found using ARFI as compared to FS [604/606 (99.7%) vs. 482/606 (79.5%), P < 0.001]. ARFI-SWV correlated significantly with FS-LS (r = 0.920, P < 0.001). ARFI-SWV increased significantly with the stage of fibrosis (1.09 ± 0.13 m/s for patients with no significant fibrosis (FS-LS < 7.6 kPa); 1.46 ± 0.27 m/s for patients with significant liver fibrosis (7.6 < FS-LS ≤ 13.0 kPa); and 2.55 ± 0.77 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis (FS-LS > 13.0 kPa)). ARFI-SWV cut-off values were identified for no significant fibrosis (1.29 m/s; sensitivity 91.4% and specificity 92.6%) and for liver cirrhosis (1.60 m/s; sensitivity 92.3% and specificity 96.5%). The optimal cut-off value for predicting liver fibrosis (F ≥ 2) was 1.32 m/s (sensitivity 87.0% and specificity 80.0%) and for liver cirrhosis (F4) 1.62 m/s (sensitivity 100% and specificity 85.7%), for patients who underwent liver biopsy. An excellent inter-and intraobserver reproducibility was observed for ARFI-SWV determinations.An ARFI-SWV cut-off value of 1.29 m/s seems to be optimal for patients with no significant liver fibrosis and 1.60 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis.Applicability and variability of liver stiffness measurements according to probe position.To investigate the liver stiffness measurement (LSM) applicability and variability with reference to three probe positions according to the region of liver biopsy.The applicability for LSM was defined as at least 10 valid measurements with a success rate greater than 60% and an interquartile range/median LSM < 30%. The LSM variability compared the inter-position concordance and the concordance with FibroTest.Four hundred and forty two consecutive patients were included. The applicability of the anterior position (81%) was significantly higher than that of the reference (69%) and lower positions (68%), (both P = 0.0001). There was a significant difference (0.5 kPa, 95% CI 0.13-0.89; P < 0.0001) between mean LSM estimated at the reference position (9.3 kPa) vs the anterior position (8.8 kPa). Discordance between positions was associated with thoracic fold (P = 0.008). The discordance rate between the reference position result and FibroTest was higher when the 7.1 kPa cutoff was used to define advanced fibrosis instead of 8.8 kPa (33.6% vs 23.5%, P = 0.03).The anterior position of the probe should be the first choice for LSM using Fibroscan, as it has a higher applicability without higher variability compared to the usual liver biopsy position.Variant adiponutrin (PNPLA3) represents a common fibrosis risk gene: non-invasive elastography-based study in chronic liver disease.Recent genome-wide association studies have identified the variant p.I148M of the adiponutrin gene PNPLA3 as a risk factor for developing severe forms of non-alcoholic and alcoholic liver diseases. The risk allele confers an increased risk for fatty liver disease and elevated serum aminotransferase activities reflecting liver injury. In the current elastography-based study, we investigate variant adiponutrin as genetic determinant of liver fibrosis, the hallmark of all chronic liver diseases.In this observational cross-sectional study, we staged 899 patients with different chronic liver diseases non-invasively by transient elastography (Fibroscan) and genotyped them for variant adiponutrin (rs738409) by PCR-based assays. A subgroup of 229 patients consented to percutaneous liver biopsy, validating the accuracy of elastography in staging fibrosis (ρ=0.743, p<0.01).Carriers of distinct p.I148M adiponutrin genotypes display significant (p=0.017) differences in liver stiffness determined by elastography. In particular, individuals carrying the allele [G] are at higher risk of developing liver cirrhosis defined by stiffness values ≥13.0kPa (OR=1.56, p=0.005). Of note, the PNPLA3 risk variant advances fibrosis in the total cohort as well as in the subgroups of patients with viral hepatitis and non-viral liver diseases and contributes 16% of the total cirrhosis risk.The adiponutrin risk variant is a common genetic determinant of progressive liver fibrosis. Our results underpin non-invasive follow-up for individuals with chronic liver disease at-risk for developing advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis.Evaluation of liver fibrosis by transient elastography using acoustic radiation force impulse: comparison with Fibroscan(®).Accurate evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver damage is required to determine the appropriate treatment. Various approaches, including laboratory tests and transient elastography, have been used to evaluate liver fibrosis. Recently, transient elastography with acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) has been developed and applied with conventional ultrasonography. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical utility of transient elastography with ARFI and to compare the results with this method and those of the Fibroscan(®) procedure.One hundred and thirty-one patients with liver damage, who underwent liver biopsy at our department, were enrolled prospectively in this study. Elastography with ARFI (applied with ACUSON S2000(®)), and Fibroscan(®) was performed at the same time as liver biopsy. These measurements were compared with histological findings in liver biopsy specimens, and measurement accuracy was evaluated by receiver-operating characteristic analysis.Elastography values with both procedures were significantly correlated with the stages of liver fibrosis and there was little difference in the results obtained using the 2 procedures. The accuracy of differential diagnosis between no fibrosis at F0 and more than F1 stage was insufficient with ARFI, but this procedure was sufficient for diagnosing advanced fibrosis. The accuracy of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method. Moreover, both ARFI and Fibroscan(®) values increased in proportion to the severity of hepatic inflammation when fibrosis stage is low, but not in proportion to the severity of steatosis.Transient elastography with ARFI is simple, non-invasive and useful for diagnosing the stage of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. The utility of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method.Reproducibility of transient elastography in the evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography (TE) is gaining popularity as a non-invasive method for predicting liver fibrosis, but intraobserver and interobserver agreement and factors influencing TE reproducibility have not been adequately assessed. This study investigated these aspects.Tertiary referral liver unit.Over a 4-month period, 200 patients with chronic liver disease (CLD) with varying aetiology consecutively underwent TE and liver biopsy.TE was performed twice by two different operators either concomitantly or within 3 days of the bioptic procedure (METAVIR classification).Intraobserver and interobserver agreement were analysed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and correlated with different patient-related and liver disease-related covariates.800 TE examinations were performed, with an indeterminate result rate of 2.4%. The overall interobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 (95% CI 0.977 to 0.987). Increased body mass index (>25 kg/m(2)), steatosis, and low staging grades (fibrosis (F) stage <2) were significantly associated with reduced ICC (p<0.05). Intraobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 for both raters. Using receiver operating characteristic curves, three diagnostic TE thresholds were identified: >7.9 kPa for F>/=2, >10.3 for F>/=3 and >11.9 for F = 4. TE values assessed by the two raters fell within the same cut-off of fibrosis in 88% of the cases for F>/=2, in 92% for F>/=3 and 91% for F = 4.TE is a highly reproducible and user-friendly technique for assessing liver fibrosis in patients with CLD. However, because TE reproducibility is significantly reduced (p<0.05) in patients with steatosis, increased BMI and lower degrees of hepatic fibrosis, caution is warranted in the clinical use of TE as a surrogate for liver biopsy.Transient elastography for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with chronic liver disease.There is increasing interest in developing noninvasive means to evaluate liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease to determine disease severity, prognosis and optimal treatment. Transient elastography (TE) has previously been demonstrated to predict the presence or absence of advanced fibrosis. The current study was conducted to determine whether TE can identify patients with chronic liver disease at risk of clinical decompensation. A total of 667 patients underwent TE and were followed for a median of 861 days and 57 patients achieved the primary outcome, a composite of clinical endpoints including death, ascites, encephalopathy, increased Child Score ≥ 2, variceal bleed, hepatocellular carcinoma or listing for transplant. Overall, TE had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.87 for predicting clinical outcome. Using a cut-off of 10.5 kPa, TE has a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value (NPV) of 94.7%, 63.0%, 19.3% and 99.2%, respectively. A predictive model for clinical events was developed using generalized cross-validation for clinical endpoints considering TE, liver biopsy results and multiple other predictors. Individually, TE performed better than biopsy, or any other variable, for predicting clinical outcome [Harrell's C Statistic 0.86 for TE, 0.78 for stage]. Patients with a TE score of >12.5 kPa were found to have a relative hazard for clinical event of 18.99 compared with patients with TE score <10.5. A combined variable model including TE, aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase ratio and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) yielded the highest predictive accuracy with Harrell's C value of 0.93. In the subset of patients with cirrhosis, TE was not found to be independently associated with clinical outcomes in univariate or multivariate analysis although it retained a high sensitivity and NPV of 97.5% and 92.3%, respectively, at a kPa cut-off of 10.5. TE can successfully identify patients with chronic liver disease who are at low risk of clinical decompensation over a time period of 2 years.Development and evaluation of a nurse-led transient elastography service for the staging of hepatic fibrosis in patients with suspected chronic liver disease.Establishing the presence of fibrosis and cirrhosis is an essential step in the management of patients with chronic liver diseases (CLD). Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) based on transient elastography (TE) correlates well with the stages of liver fibrosis and has been developed as a non-invasive alternative to liver biopsy. The studies performed to date have used physician operators. With the potential use of TE for screening of community-based populations for liver disease, we aimed to evaluate the performance of nurse operators.Retrospective analysis.We reviewed the reliability and accuracy of LSMs performed by the nurse-led TE service at Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham between May 2009 and January 2011. Consecutive patients with suspected CLD who underwent LSM were included.Over the study period 585 LSMs were performed. Analysis was performed on the 208 patients where LSM could be compared with liver biopsy findings. Of these 11 (5.3%) had unreliable LSM results (less than 10 valid shots or success rate <60%). There were no LSM failures. Inadequate liver biopsy specimen led to exclusion in 26 (12.5%) patients. For the detection of significant fibrosis (Ishak stage >2), a sensitivity of 0.78 and specificity of 0.81 was obtained, with a cut-off value of 8 kPa. Using a cut-off value of 13 kPa for detection of cirrhosis, a sensitivity and specificity of 0.8 and 0.92 was obtained.We have demonstrated that a nurse-led TE service can produce a low level of unreliable results and LSM failures, with comparable sensitivity and specificity for detecting significant fibrosis and cirrhosis to those reported in the literature. The demands on the use of TE could potentially be eased through the introduction of nurse-led service delivery.Transient elastography accurately predicts presence of significant portal hypertension in patients with chronic liver disease.Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is a prognostic marker in patients with cirrhosis. Transient elastography measures liver stiffness (LS).To assess the correlation between LS and HVPG and to investigate the performance of transient elastography for the diagnosis of significant portal hypertension (PHT).Liver stiffness was measured by Fibroscan in 150 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy with haemodynamic measurements. Usual clinical and biological data were collected. Significant PHT was defined as a HVPG > or = 10 mmHg.Hepatic venous pressure gradient was found to be > or = 10 mmHg in 76 patients. Cirrhosis was diagnosed in 89 patients. HVPG was found to be correlated with: LS (rho = 0.858; P < 0.001) and inversely correlated with prothrombin index (rho = -0.718; P < 0.001). Regarding significant PHT, AUROC for LS and prothrombin index were 0.945 [0.904-0.987] and 0.892 [0.837-0.947] respectively. The cut-off value of 21 kPa accurately predicted significant PHT in 92% of the 144 patients for whom LS was successful.Liver stiffness measurement is correlated with HVPG and transient elastography identifies patients with significant PHT.Diagnosis of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis using liver stiffness measurement: comparison between M and XL probe of FibroScan®.Unreliable results of liver stiffness measurement are obtained in 16% of cases and are independently associated with body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 kg/m(2). A new FibroScan® probe (XL probe) was designed specifically for obese patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of liver stiffness measurement using M and XL probes of Fibroscan® for the diagnosis of fibrosis and cirrhosis in a large cohort of patients.Consecutive patients undergoing liver biopsies for chronic liver disease were prospectively recruited. Liver stiffness measurement was performed within 1 week before liver biopsy using both M and XL probes of FibroScan®.A total of 286 patients were evaluated. A reliable liver stiffness measurement using M probe was obtained in 79.7% of cases. In the other 21.3%, liver stiffness measurement using XL probe was obtained in 56.9% of patients. A strong correlation was found between M and XL values, regardless of BMI. In all groups, median liver stiffness measurement using the XL probe was significantly lower than liver stiffness measurement using the M probe. By multivariate analysis, unsuccessful liver stiffness examination with M probe was independently associated with age >50 years and BMI >30 kg/m(2). By univariate analysis, only BMI >30 kg/m(2) was associated with unsuccessful liver stiffness measurement with XL probe. No significant difference was observed between the M and XL probes for the diagnosis of liver fibrosis.Liver stiffness measurement with either M or XL probe is possible in 91.2% of patients with comparable diagnostic accuracy. In clinical practice, the M probe could be used as first step for liver stiffness measurement. In case of no valid shot or unreliable measurement, the XL probe could be used. This result could be useful for the assessment of liver fibrosis in NAFLD and/or obese patients.Assessment of asymptomatic liver fibrosis in alcoholic patients using fibroscan: prospective comparison with seven non-invasive laboratory tests.Systematic screening for liver fibrosis in heavy-drinking patients is a challenge. Aims To assess Fibroscan for non-invasive diagnosis of asymptomatic liver fibrosis in alcohol abuse patients, to determine diagnostic liver stiffness cut-off values and to compare performance of Fibroscan with seven non-invasive laboratory tests.One hundred and three alcoholic patients were studied. Liver fibrosis was staged by METAVIR system. Fibroscan, Fibrotest, Fibrometer, Hepascore, APRI, PGA, PGAA and hyaluronic acid tests were performed. Liver stiffness cut-offs were determined using receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves.Liver stiffness was correlated with fibrosis (r = 0.72, P < 0.014), with median at 5.7, 6.3, 8.4, 15 and 47.3 kPa for F0 (n = 8), F1 (n = 18), F2 (n = 24), F3 (n = 20) and F4 (n = 33) stage fibrosis respectively. For Fibroscan, areas under ROC curves (AUROCs) were 0.84 (95% CI: 0.73-0.95) (F > or = 1), 0.91 (0.85-0.98) (F > or = 2), 0.90 (0.82-0.97) (F > or = 3) and 0.92 (0.87-0.98) (F = 4), yielding diagnostic stiffness cut-offs of 5.9 (F > or = 1), 7.8 (F > or = 2), 11 (F > or = 3) and 19.5 (F4) kPa. Sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were 80%, 90.5%, 93% and 70% for F > or = 2, and 85.7%, 84.2%, 68.6% and 87.9% for F = 4. Performance of Fibroscan was higher than seven laboratory tests, for which AUROCs ranged from 0.66 to 0.77 (F > or = 1), from 0.54 to 0.82 (F > or = 2), from 0.43 to 0.88 (F > or = 3) and from 0.56 to 0.89 (F = 4), with significant difference only vs. APRI (P < 0.001) and Hepascore (P = 0.04). Combining Fibroscan with each tests did not improve performance.Fibroscan is effective to assess liver fibrosis in alcoholic patients. Instant screening of liver fibrosis in heavy drinkers is feasible without liver biopsy.ARFI, FibroScan, ELF, and their combinations in the assessment of liver fibrosis: a prospective study.Our aim was to evaluate a serologic marker (ELF) and two ultrasound-based methods (FibroScan and ARFI), as well as their combinations, in the assessment of liver fibrosis.One-hundred and forty-six patients (87 liver transplant recipients, 59 non-transplant patients) who underwent liver biopsy were prospectively included. We evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of FibroScan, ARFI, ELF and the combination of ELF with either ARFI or FibroScan. After analyzing in separate transplant and non-transplant patients, the whole cohort was divided into a training set and a validation set.ARFI imaging was successfully performed across the whole cohort, while FibroScan failed in 16 (11%) patients. The three methods showed similar AUROCs and best cut-off values in transplant and non-transplant patients. In the training set, differences between the AUROCs of ARFI, FibroScan and ELF to diagnose F⩾2 (0.879, 0.861, and 0.764, respectively) and cirrhosis (0.936, 0.918, and 0.841) were not statistically significant, although both ultrasound-based methods showed higher accuracy than ELF. The combination of ELF with ARFI or FibroScan increased the negative and positive predictive values of single tests for the diagnosis of F ≥ 2 and cirrhosis. Similar results were obtained when the methods were tested in the validation set.ARFI is as effective as either FibroScan or ELF in the non-invasive assessment of liver fibrosis, and its inclusion in an ultrasound device could facilitate its incorporation into routine clinical practice. The combination of ARFI or FibroScan with ELF may help better identify patients with or without significant fibrosis or cirrhosis.The combination of a blood test and Fibroscan improves the non-invasive diagnosis of liver fibrosis.Blood tests and liver stiffness evaluation (LSE) by ultrasonographic elastometry are accurate tools for diagnosing liver fibrosis. We evaluated whether their synchronous combination in new scores could improve the diagnostic accuracy and reduce liver biopsy requirement in algorithm.Three hundred and ninety patients with chronic liver disease of miscellaneous causes were included. Five blood fibrosis tests were evaluated: APRI, FIB-4, Hepascore, Fibrotest and FibroMeter. The reference was fibrosis Metavir staging.Diagnosis of significant fibrosis (Metavir F>or=2). The most accurate synchronous combination was FibroMeter+LSE, which provided a significantly higher area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (0.892) than LSE alone (0.867, P=0.011) or Fibrometer (0.834, P<10(-3)). An algorithm using the FibroMeter+LSE combination and then a liver biopsy in indeterminate cases had 91.9% diagnostic accuracy and required significantly fewer biopsies (20.2%) than previously published Bordeaux algorithm (28.6%, P=0.02) or sequential algorithm for fibrosis evaluation (SAFE) (55.7%, P<10(-3)). The Angers algorithm performance was not significantly different between viral hepatitis and other causes. Diagnosis of cirrhosis. The most accurate synchronous combination was LSE+FibroMeter, which provided >or=90% predictive values for cirrhosis in 90.6% of patients vs 87.4% for LSE (P=0.02) and 57.9% for FibroMeter (P<10(-3)). An algorithm including the LSE+FibroMeter combination, and then a liver biopsy in indeterminate cases, had a significantly higher diagnostic accuracy than the SAFE algorithm (91.0 vs 79.8%, P<10(-3)), and required significantly fewer biopsies than the Bordeaux algorithm (9.3 vs 25.3%, P<10(-3)).The synchronous combination of a blood test plus LSE improves the accuracy of the non-invasive diagnosis of liver fibrosis and, consequently, markedly decreases the biopsy requirement in the diagnostic algorithm, notably to <10% in cirrhosis diagnosis.Assessment of liver fibrosis using transient elastography in patients with alcoholic liver disease.The aim of this study was to assess the accuracy of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) for the diagnosis of extensive fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease (ALD).One hundred and seventy-four patients with ALD were enrolled in four liver units and underwent concomitant liver biopsy and LSM. Fibrosis was assessed using the Brunt et al. and the Chevallier et al. scoring systems. Steatosis and histological alcoholic hepatitis (HAH) were quoted in classes.Twenty-seven patients had inadequate biopsy or LSM. Distribution in 147 patients according to the Brunt score (median LSM) was: F1: n=13 (5.7kPa); F2: n=24 (8.3kPa); F3: n=31 (17.5kPa) and F4: n=79 (40.9kPa) (P<0.0001). LSM was correlated with the amount of fibrosis according to the Chevallier score (r=0.70, P<0.0001). LSM was correlated to fibrosis stage (tau beta, 0.53; P<0.0001) and HAH (tau beta, 0.30; P<0.0001). In multivariate analysis, fibrosis was the only parameter correlated with LSM. The areas under the ROC curve were 0.94 and 0.87 for the diagnosis of extensive fibrosis (Brunt et al. score > or =3) and cirrhosis, respectively (threshold-values: 12.9 and 22.6kPa).LSM accurately assesses extensive fibrosis and cirrhosis in alcoholic patients.Transient elastography: a valid alternative to biopsy in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography is a novel and non-invasive technique for the evaluation of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. Few studies that exist value the efficacy of transient elastography, mainly in hepatitis C virus-infected patients.To evaluate the effectiveness, objectivity, reproducibility and safety of this technique.We included 103 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy in the last 48 months with a wide spectrum of chronic liver diseases. Median stiffness value (expressed as kilopascals - kPa) was kept as representative of the liver elastic modulus. All biopsy specimens were analysed by the same pathologist according to the METAVIR scoring system.Median value of stiffness in patients with mild or moderate fibrosis (FI and FII), and severe fibrosis or cirrhosis (FIII and FIV) was of 7, 4 +/- 5 and 16, 4 +/- 10 kPa, respectively, with a significant difference between them (P < 0.05). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves showed the optimal liver stiffness cut-off values for each group.We found a positive correlation between the liver stiffness found by transient elastography and fibrosis stage on biopsy in all patients, independently of the liver disease aetiology. Transient elastography is an easy, quick to perform and safe non-invasive procedure, reliable for assessing liver fibrosis.[Elastography--a new tool for diagnosis of chronic liver diseases. Might replace liver biopsy, but not always].Transient elastography as a screening tool for liver fibrosis and cirrhosis in a community-based population aged over 45 years.Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) has been used to measure fibrosis in patients with various types of chronic liver diseases. However, its usefulness as a screening procedure in apparently healthy people had not been evaluated to date.1358 subjects >45 years old from a general population attending for a medical check-up were consecutively enrolled in the study. All subjects were submitted to medical examination and laboratory tests in addition to LSM, performed on the same day by a single operator. Subjects with LSM values >8 kPa were referred to a liver unit for further investigations.168 subjects were not considered for analysis due to missing data (n=23), LSM failure (n=51) or unreliable LSM values (n=94). Among the 1190 remaining subjects, 89 (7.5%) had LSM >8 kPa including nine patients with LSM >13 kPa. Despite the fact that normal liver tests were observed in 43% of them (38 out of 89), a specific cause of chronic liver disease was found in all cases. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) was the likely cause of chronic liver disease in 52 patients, alcoholic liver disease (ALD) in 20, and both causes were associated in seven additional patients. Hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus chronic hepatitis was documented in five and four cases, respectively, and primary biliary cirrhosis in one. Liver biopsy was obtained for 27 patients, including the nine patients with LSM >13 kPa, who were diagnosed with liver cirrhosis due to ALD (n=5), chronic hepatitis C (n=3) or chronic hepatitis B (n=1). The 18 remaining biopsies showed liver fibrosis in all cases except one (isolated steatosis), with ALD and NAFLD being present in six and eight cases, respectively.LSM proved to be a useful and specific procedure to screen for cirrhosis in the general population and to detect undiagnosed chronic liver disease in apparently healthy subjects.Noninvasive markers of fibrosis and inflammation in clinical practice: prospective comparison with liver biopsy.The efficiency of transient elastography for the assessment of liver fibrosis has been evaluated mainly in patients with chronic hepatitis C and chronic hepatitis B, with few studies with nonviral chronic liver disease (CLD) such as autoimmune hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In this study, we examined the value of transient elastography in a number of groups in comparison with the Fibrotest/Actitest (FT/AT), using the liver biopsy (LB) as the reference standard.An unselected and consecutive group of 65 patients had an LB either as part of an initial diagnosis or of a follow-up assessment, and in addition had a transient elastography measurement [Fibroscan (FS)] and serum blood tests FT/AT performed before the LB. The group consisted of patients diagnosed with a variety of CLD: chronic hepatitis C (n=27), chronic hepatitis B (n=8), alcoholic liver disease (n=14), autoimmune hepatitis (n=13) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (n=4).FS optimal cutoff values were 9.70 kPa for F at least 2, 13.00 kPa for F at least 3, and 16.00 kPa for F=4. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve of FS and FT for F at least 2 were 0.88 versus 0.78 in the viral CLD group and 0.81 versus 0.70 in the nonviral CLD group and 0.87 versus 0.80 in all patients. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve for A at least 2 in all patients was 0.83. The optimal cutoff for A at least 2 was 0.50.FT/AT is a reliable method for predicting significant liver fibrosis and necroinflammation in both viral and nonviral CLD patients with a value measurement comparable with that of the FS.Liver stiffness measurement as a predictive tool of clinically significant portal hypertension in patients with compensated hepatitis C virus or alcohol-related cirrhosis.Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is the gold standard for assessing the presence and the severity of portal hypertension (PHT). Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) is a non-invasive method for liver fibrosis assessment.To assess the relationship between LSM and HVPG in patients with compensated cirrhosis related to hepatitis C virus (HCV) or alcohol and to define the performance and the best cut-off of LSM for the diagnosis of PHT in these patients.Between January 2004 and September 2006, we studied all the consecutive patients with compensated HCV or alcohol-related-cirrhosis referred for transjugular liver biopsy with HVPG measurement and LSM performed the same day.Ninety-two patients were eligible, 44 had HCV related-cirrhosis and 48 alcoholic cirrhosis. LSM was positively correlated to HVPG in both groups. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the diagnosis of significant PHT was 0.76 +/- 0.07 in HCV patients (best cut-off at 20.5 kPa) and 0.94 +/- 0.03 (best cut-off at 34.9 kPa) in alcoholic patients.Liver stiffness measurement and HVPG were significantly correlated in patients with compensated cirrhosis because of HCV infection or alcohol. LSM could predict significant PHT in both these groups of patients with a higher cut-off and a better performance in alcoholic patients.Evaluation of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging for determination of liver stiffness using transient elastography as a reference.To evaluate cut-off values and performance of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI) using transient elastography [FibroScan© (FS)] as a reference.Six hundred and six patients were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent liver stiffness measurement with FS (FS-LS) and ARFI (with shear wave velocity quantification; ARFI-SWV) and the performance of ARFI in comparison to FS was determined. Sixty-eight patients underwent liver biopsy.Significantly higher success rates for the determination of liver stiffness were found using ARFI as compared to FS [604/606 (99.7%) vs. 482/606 (79.5%), P < 0.001]. ARFI-SWV correlated significantly with FS-LS (r = 0.920, P < 0.001). ARFI-SWV increased significantly with the stage of fibrosis (1.09 ± 0.13 m/s for patients with no significant fibrosis (FS-LS < 7.6 kPa); 1.46 ± 0.27 m/s for patients with significant liver fibrosis (7.6 < FS-LS ≤ 13.0 kPa); and 2.55 ± 0.77 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis (FS-LS > 13.0 kPa)). ARFI-SWV cut-off values were identified for no significant fibrosis (1.29 m/s; sensitivity 91.4% and specificity 92.6%) and for liver cirrhosis (1.60 m/s; sensitivity 92.3% and specificity 96.5%). The optimal cut-off value for predicting liver fibrosis (F ≥ 2) was 1.32 m/s (sensitivity 87.0% and specificity 80.0%) and for liver cirrhosis (F4) 1.62 m/s (sensitivity 100% and specificity 85.7%), for patients who underwent liver biopsy. An excellent inter-and intraobserver reproducibility was observed for ARFI-SWV determinations.An ARFI-SWV cut-off value of 1.29 m/s seems to be optimal for patients with no significant liver fibrosis and 1.60 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis.Can transient elastography replace liver histology for determination of advanced fibrosis in alcoholic patients: a real-life study.Consensus is lacking whether cut-off values for different fibrosis stages using transient elastography (TE, FibroScan) are universally applicable to all liver diseases. We evaluated the performance of TE in predicting severe fibrosis (> or =F3) in alcoholic patients using cut-off values validated for chronic hepatitis C.Patients admitted for alcohol withdrawal were prospectively evaluated by TE and biochemistry for aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio index (APRI) and Forns score calculations. If TE revealed severe fibrosis (> or =F3), hepatic venous pressure gradient measurements and transjugular liver biopsy were proposed results of which were correlated and compared with TE measurements or APRI and Forns scores.Among 239 patients, 72 had liver TE scores > or =F3 and 23 declined liver biopsy leaving a final study population of 49 patients. Compared with biopsy, 32 patients were correctly classified by TE, whereas 16 patients differed by 2 fibrosis stages yielding a positive predictive value of 65% for liver fibrosis > or =F3 at TE. Specificity and sensitivity of TE improved beyond 75% and 70%, respectively, with modified cut-offs of 17 (F3) and 21.1 kPa (F4). Areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves were 0.766 and 0.864 for severe fibrosis (> or =F3) and cirrhosis, respectively. APRI and Forns scores performed less well than TE regarding sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and area under the receiver operating characteristic values. A significant correlation was found between hepatic venous pressure gradients and liver stiffness values at TE.TE with modified cut-offs has the potential to predict advanced fibrosis and significant portal hypertension in alcoholic patients. APRI and Forns scores are of limited usefulness in alcoholics.Applicability and variability of liver stiffness measurements according to probe position.To investigate the liver stiffness measurement (LSM) applicability and variability with reference to three probe positions according to the region of liver biopsy.The applicability for LSM was defined as at least 10 valid measurements with a success rate greater than 60% and an interquartile range/median LSM < 30%. The LSM variability compared the inter-position concordance and the concordance with FibroTest.Four hundred and forty two consecutive patients were included. The applicability of the anterior position (81%) was significantly higher than that of the reference (69%) and lower positions (68%), (both P = 0.0001). There was a significant difference (0.5 kPa, 95% CI 0.13-0.89; P < 0.0001) between mean LSM estimated at the reference position (9.3 kPa) vs the anterior position (8.8 kPa). Discordance between positions was associated with thoracic fold (P = 0.008). The discordance rate between the reference position result and FibroTest was higher when the 7.1 kPa cutoff was used to define advanced fibrosis instead of 8.8 kPa (33.6% vs 23.5%, P = 0.03).The anterior position of the probe should be the first choice for LSM using Fibroscan, as it has a higher applicability without higher variability compared to the usual liver biopsy position.Variant adiponutrin (PNPLA3) represents a common fibrosis risk gene: non-invasive elastography-based study in chronic liver disease.Recent genome-wide association studies have identified the variant p.I148M of the adiponutrin gene PNPLA3 as a risk factor for developing severe forms of non-alcoholic and alcoholic liver diseases. The risk allele confers an increased risk for fatty liver disease and elevated serum aminotransferase activities reflecting liver injury. In the current elastography-based study, we investigate variant adiponutrin as genetic determinant of liver fibrosis, the hallmark of all chronic liver diseases.In this observational cross-sectional study, we staged 899 patients with different chronic liver diseases non-invasively by transient elastography (Fibroscan) and genotyped them for variant adiponutrin (rs738409) by PCR-based assays. A subgroup of 229 patients consented to percutaneous liver biopsy, validating the accuracy of elastography in staging fibrosis (ρ=0.743, p<0.01).Carriers of distinct p.I148M adiponutrin genotypes display significant (p=0.017) differences in liver stiffness determined by elastography. In particular, individuals carrying the allele [G] are at higher risk of developing liver cirrhosis defined by stiffness values ≥13.0kPa (OR=1.56, p=0.005). Of note, the PNPLA3 risk variant advances fibrosis in the total cohort as well as in the subgroups of patients with viral hepatitis and non-viral liver diseases and contributes 16% of the total cirrhosis risk.The adiponutrin risk variant is a common genetic determinant of progressive liver fibrosis. Our results underpin non-invasive follow-up for individuals with chronic liver disease at-risk for developing advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis.Evaluation of liver fibrosis by transient elastography using acoustic radiation force impulse: comparison with Fibroscan(®).Accurate evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver damage is required to determine the appropriate treatment. Various approaches, including laboratory tests and transient elastography, have been used to evaluate liver fibrosis. Recently, transient elastography with acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) has been developed and applied with conventional ultrasonography. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical utility of transient elastography with ARFI and to compare the results with this method and those of the Fibroscan(®) procedure.One hundred and thirty-one patients with liver damage, who underwent liver biopsy at our department, were enrolled prospectively in this study. Elastography with ARFI (applied with ACUSON S2000(®)), and Fibroscan(®) was performed at the same time as liver biopsy. These measurements were compared with histological findings in liver biopsy specimens, and measurement accuracy was evaluated by receiver-operating characteristic analysis.Elastography values with both procedures were significantly correlated with the stages of liver fibrosis and there was little difference in the results obtained using the 2 procedures. The accuracy of differential diagnosis between no fibrosis at F0 and more than F1 stage was insufficient with ARFI, but this procedure was sufficient for diagnosing advanced fibrosis. The accuracy of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method. Moreover, both ARFI and Fibroscan(®) values increased in proportion to the severity of hepatic inflammation when fibrosis stage is low, but not in proportion to the severity of steatosis.Transient elastography with ARFI is simple, non-invasive and useful for diagnosing the stage of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. The utility of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method.Reproducibility of transient elastography in the evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography (TE) is gaining popularity as a non-invasive method for predicting liver fibrosis, but intraobserver and interobserver agreement and factors influencing TE reproducibility have not been adequately assessed. This study investigated these aspects.Tertiary referral liver unit.Over a 4-month period, 200 patients with chronic liver disease (CLD) with varying aetiology consecutively underwent TE and liver biopsy.TE was performed twice by two different operators either concomitantly or within 3 days of the bioptic procedure (METAVIR classification).Intraobserver and interobserver agreement were analysed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and correlated with different patient-related and liver disease-related covariates.800 TE examinations were performed, with an indeterminate result rate of 2.4%. The overall interobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 (95% CI 0.977 to 0.987). Increased body mass index (>25 kg/m(2)), steatosis, and low staging grades (fibrosis (F) stage <2) were significantly associated with reduced ICC (p<0.05). Intraobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 for both raters. Using receiver operating characteristic curves, three diagnostic TE thresholds were identified: >7.9 kPa for F>/=2, >10.3 for F>/=3 and >11.9 for F = 4. TE values assessed by the two raters fell within the same cut-off of fibrosis in 88% of the cases for F>/=2, in 92% for F>/=3 and 91% for F = 4.TE is a highly reproducible and user-friendly technique for assessing liver fibrosis in patients with CLD. However, because TE reproducibility is significantly reduced (p<0.05) in patients with steatosis, increased BMI and lower degrees of hepatic fibrosis, caution is warranted in the clinical use of TE as a surrogate for liver biopsy.Transient elastography for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with chronic liver disease.There is increasing interest in developing noninvasive means to evaluate liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease to determine disease severity, prognosis and optimal treatment. Transient elastography (TE) has previously been demonstrated to predict the presence or absence of advanced fibrosis. The current study was conducted to determine whether TE can identify patients with chronic liver disease at risk of clinical decompensation. A total of 667 patients underwent TE and were followed for a median of 861 days and 57 patients achieved the primary outcome, a composite of clinical endpoints including death, ascites, encephalopathy, increased Child Score ≥ 2, variceal bleed, hepatocellular carcinoma or listing for transplant. Overall, TE had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.87 for predicting clinical outcome. Using a cut-off of 10.5 kPa, TE has a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value (NPV) of 94.7%, 63.0%, 19.3% and 99.2%, respectively. A predictive model for clinical events was developed using generalized cross-validation for clinical endpoints considering TE, liver biopsy results and multiple other predictors. Individually, TE performed better than biopsy, or any other variable, for predicting clinical outcome [Harrell's C Statistic 0.86 for TE, 0.78 for stage]. Patients with a TE score of >12.5 kPa were found to have a relative hazard for clinical event of 18.99 compared with patients with TE score <10.5. A combined variable model including TE, aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase ratio and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) yielded the highest predictive accuracy with Harrell's C value of 0.93. In the subset of patients with cirrhosis, TE was not found to be independently associated with clinical outcomes in univariate or multivariate analysis although it retained a high sensitivity and NPV of 97.5% and 92.3%, respectively, at a kPa cut-off of 10.5. TE can successfully identify patients with chronic liver disease who are at low risk of clinical decompensation over a time period of 2 years.[The usefulness of transient elastography to diagnose cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease].It is not easy to differentiate between patients with cirrhosis and those with alcoholic liver disease. Liver biopsy is generally considered the gold standard for assessing hepatic fibrosis; however, this protocol frequently carries a risk of severe complications and false-negative results. Transient elastography (Fibroscan, Echosens, Paris, France), which is a noninvasive method of measuring liver stiffness, has become available for assessing liver fibrosis. Liver stiffness reportedly differs markedly with the cirrhosis etiology. The aim of this study was thus to determine the diagnostic accuracy of the Fibroscan in the detection of cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease.We enrolled 45 patients with alcoholic liver disease. Fibroscan, abdominal ultrasonography, aspartate aminotransferase/platelet ratio index (APRI), and liver biopsy were performed on all patients. Fibrosis stage was assessed using the Batts-Ludwig scoring system.The stage of fibrosis (F1-F4) was distributed among the cohort as follows: 5 patients at F1, 4 patients at F2, 7 patients at F3, and 29 patients at F4. Liver stiffness differed significantly between each fibrosis stage (P<0.001). For the diagnosis of cirrhosis, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was 0.97 for transient elastography (95% confidence interval, CI, 0.93-1.01), 0.81 for ultrasonography (95% CI, 0.68-0.94), and 0.83 for APRI score (95% CI, 0.70-0.95). The optimal cut-off value of liver stiffness for detecting cirrhosis was 25.8 kPa, with a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 87%.Transient elastography is a useful method for diagnosing cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease.Development and evaluation of a nurse-led transient elastography service for the staging of hepatic fibrosis in patients with suspected chronic liver disease.Establishing the presence of fibrosis and cirrhosis is an essential step in the management of patients with chronic liver diseases (CLD). Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) based on transient elastography (TE) correlates well with the stages of liver fibrosis and has been developed as a non-invasive alternative to liver biopsy. The studies performed to date have used physician operators. With the potential use of TE for screening of community-based populations for liver disease, we aimed to evaluate the performance of nurse operators.Retrospective analysis.We reviewed the reliability and accuracy of LSMs performed by the nurse-led TE service at Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham between May 2009 and January 2011. Consecutive patients with suspected CLD who underwent LSM were included.Over the study period 585 LSMs were performed. Analysis was performed on the 208 patients where LSM could be compared with liver biopsy findings. Of these 11 (5.3%) had unreliable LSM results (less than 10 valid shots or success rate <60%). There were no LSM failures. Inadequate liver biopsy specimen led to exclusion in 26 (12.5%) patients. For the detection of significant fibrosis (Ishak stage >2), a sensitivity of 0.78 and specificity of 0.81 was obtained, with a cut-off value of 8 kPa. Using a cut-off value of 13 kPa for detection of cirrhosis, a sensitivity and specificity of 0.8 and 0.92 was obtained.We have demonstrated that a nurse-led TE service can produce a low level of unreliable results and LSM failures, with comparable sensitivity and specificity for detecting significant fibrosis and cirrhosis to those reported in the literature. The demands on the use of TE could potentially be eased through the introduction of nurse-led service delivery.Transient elastography accurately predicts presence of significant portal hypertension in patients with chronic liver disease.Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is a prognostic marker in patients with cirrhosis. Transient elastography measures liver stiffness (LS).To assess the correlation between LS and HVPG and to investigate the performance of transient elastography for the diagnosis of significant portal hypertension (PHT).Liver stiffness was measured by Fibroscan in 150 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy with haemodynamic measurements. Usual clinical and biological data were collected. Significant PHT was defined as a HVPG > or = 10 mmHg.Hepatic venous pressure gradient was found to be > or = 10 mmHg in 76 patients. Cirrhosis was diagnosed in 89 patients. HVPG was found to be correlated with: LS (rho = 0.858; P < 0.001) and inversely correlated with prothrombin index (rho = -0.718; P < 0.001). Regarding significant PHT, AUROC for LS and prothrombin index were 0.945 [0.904-0.987] and 0.892 [0.837-0.947] respectively. The cut-off value of 21 kPa accurately predicted significant PHT in 92% of the 144 patients for whom LS was successful.Liver stiffness measurement is correlated with HVPG and transient elastography identifies patients with significant PHT.Diagnosis of liver fibrosis and cirrhosis using liver stiffness measurement: comparison between M and XL probe of FibroScan®.Unreliable results of liver stiffness measurement are obtained in 16% of cases and are independently associated with body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 kg/m(2). A new FibroScan® probe (XL probe) was designed specifically for obese patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of liver stiffness measurement using M and XL probes of Fibroscan® for the diagnosis of fibrosis and cirrhosis in a large cohort of patients.Consecutive patients undergoing liver biopsies for chronic liver disease were prospectively recruited. Liver stiffness measurement was performed within 1 week before liver biopsy using both M and XL probes of FibroScan®.A total of 286 patients were evaluated. A reliable liver stiffness measurement using M probe was obtained in 79.7% of cases. In the other 21.3%, liver stiffness measurement using XL probe was obtained in 56.9% of patients. A strong correlation was found between M and XL values, regardless of BMI. In all groups, median liver stiffness measurement using the XL probe was significantly lower than liver stiffness measurement using the M probe. By multivariate analysis, unsuccessful liver stiffness examination with M probe was independently associated with age >50 years and BMI >30 kg/m(2). By univariate analysis, only BMI >30 kg/m(2) was associated with unsuccessful liver stiffness measurement with XL probe. No significant difference was observed between the M and XL probes for the diagnosis of liver fibrosis.Liver stiffness measurement with either M or XL probe is possible in 91.2% of patients with comparable diagnostic accuracy. In clinical practice, the M probe could be used as first step for liver stiffness measurement. In case of no valid shot or unreliable measurement, the XL probe could be used. This result could be useful for the assessment of liver fibrosis in NAFLD and/or obese patients.Assessment of asymptomatic liver fibrosis in alcoholic patients using fibroscan: prospective comparison with seven non-invasive laboratory tests.Systematic screening for liver fibrosis in heavy-drinking patients is a challenge. Aims To assess Fibroscan for non-invasive diagnosis of asymptomatic liver fibrosis in alcohol abuse patients, to determine diagnostic liver stiffness cut-off values and to compare performance of Fibroscan with seven non-invasive laboratory tests.One hundred and three alcoholic patients were studied. Liver fibrosis was staged by METAVIR system. Fibroscan, Fibrotest, Fibrometer, Hepascore, APRI, PGA, PGAA and hyaluronic acid tests were performed. Liver stiffness cut-offs were determined using receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curves.Liver stiffness was correlated with fibrosis (r = 0.72, P < 0.014), with median at 5.7, 6.3, 8.4, 15 and 47.3 kPa for F0 (n = 8), F1 (n = 18), F2 (n = 24), F3 (n = 20) and F4 (n = 33) stage fibrosis respectively. For Fibroscan, areas under ROC curves (AUROCs) were 0.84 (95% CI: 0.73-0.95) (F > or = 1), 0.91 (0.85-0.98) (F > or = 2), 0.90 (0.82-0.97) (F > or = 3) and 0.92 (0.87-0.98) (F = 4), yielding diagnostic stiffness cut-offs of 5.9 (F > or = 1), 7.8 (F > or = 2), 11 (F > or = 3) and 19.5 (F4) kPa. Sensitivity, specificity, PPV and NPV were 80%, 90.5%, 93% and 70% for F > or = 2, and 85.7%, 84.2%, 68.6% and 87.9% for F = 4. Performance of Fibroscan was higher than seven laboratory tests, for which AUROCs ranged from 0.66 to 0.77 (F > or = 1), from 0.54 to 0.82 (F > or = 2), from 0.43 to 0.88 (F > or = 3) and from 0.56 to 0.89 (F = 4), with significant difference only vs. APRI (P < 0.001) and Hepascore (P = 0.04). Combining Fibroscan with each tests did not improve performance.Fibroscan is effective to assess liver fibrosis in alcoholic patients. Instant screening of liver fibrosis in heavy drinkers is feasible without liver biopsy.ARFI, FibroScan, ELF, and their combinations in the assessment of liver fibrosis: a prospective study.Our aim was to evaluate a serologic marker (ELF) and two ultrasound-based methods (FibroScan and ARFI), as well as their combinations, in the assessment of liver fibrosis.One-hundred and forty-six patients (87 liver transplant recipients, 59 non-transplant patients) who underwent liver biopsy were prospectively included. We evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of FibroScan, ARFI, ELF and the combination of ELF with either ARFI or FibroScan. After analyzing in separate transplant and non-transplant patients, the whole cohort was divided into a training set and a validation set.ARFI imaging was successfully performed across the whole cohort, while FibroScan failed in 16 (11%) patients. The three methods showed similar AUROCs and best cut-off values in transplant and non-transplant patients. In the training set, differences between the AUROCs of ARFI, FibroScan and ELF to diagnose F⩾2 (0.879, 0.861, and 0.764, respectively) and cirrhosis (0.936, 0.918, and 0.841) were not statistically significant, although both ultrasound-based methods showed higher accuracy than ELF. The combination of ELF with ARFI or FibroScan increased the negative and positive predictive values of single tests for the diagnosis of F ≥ 2 and cirrhosis. Similar results were obtained when the methods were tested in the validation set.ARFI is as effective as either FibroScan or ELF in the non-invasive assessment of liver fibrosis, and its inclusion in an ultrasound device could facilitate its incorporation into routine clinical practice. The combination of ARFI or FibroScan with ELF may help better identify patients with or without significant fibrosis or cirrhosis.The combination of a blood test and Fibroscan improves the non-invasive diagnosis of liver fibrosis.Blood tests and liver stiffness evaluation (LSE) by ultrasonographic elastometry are accurate tools for diagnosing liver fibrosis. We evaluated whether their synchronous combination in new scores could improve the diagnostic accuracy and reduce liver biopsy requirement in algorithm.Three hundred and ninety patients with chronic liver disease of miscellaneous causes were included. Five blood fibrosis tests were evaluated: APRI, FIB-4, Hepascore, Fibrotest and FibroMeter. The reference was fibrosis Metavir staging.Diagnosis of significant fibrosis (Metavir F>or=2). The most accurate synchronous combination was FibroMeter+LSE, which provided a significantly higher area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (0.892) than LSE alone (0.867, P=0.011) or Fibrometer (0.834, P<10(-3)). An algorithm using the FibroMeter+LSE combination and then a liver biopsy in indeterminate cases had 91.9% diagnostic accuracy and required significantly fewer biopsies (20.2%) than previously published Bordeaux algorithm (28.6%, P=0.02) or sequential algorithm for fibrosis evaluation (SAFE) (55.7%, P<10(-3)). The Angers algorithm performance was not significantly different between viral hepatitis and other causes. Diagnosis of cirrhosis. The most accurate synchronous combination was LSE+FibroMeter, which provided >or=90% predictive values for cirrhosis in 90.6% of patients vs 87.4% for LSE (P=0.02) and 57.9% for FibroMeter (P<10(-3)). An algorithm including the LSE+FibroMeter combination, and then a liver biopsy in indeterminate cases, had a significantly higher diagnostic accuracy than the SAFE algorithm (91.0 vs 79.8%, P<10(-3)), and required significantly fewer biopsies than the Bordeaux algorithm (9.3 vs 25.3%, P<10(-3)).The synchronous combination of a blood test plus LSE improves the accuracy of the non-invasive diagnosis of liver fibrosis and, consequently, markedly decreases the biopsy requirement in the diagnostic algorithm, notably to <10% in cirrhosis diagnosis.Assessment of liver fibrosis using transient elastography in patients with alcoholic liver disease.The aim of this study was to assess the accuracy of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) for the diagnosis of extensive fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease (ALD).One hundred and seventy-four patients with ALD were enrolled in four liver units and underwent concomitant liver biopsy and LSM. Fibrosis was assessed using the Brunt et al. and the Chevallier et al. scoring systems. Steatosis and histological alcoholic hepatitis (HAH) were quoted in classes.Twenty-seven patients had inadequate biopsy or LSM. Distribution in 147 patients according to the Brunt score (median LSM) was: F1: n=13 (5.7kPa); F2: n=24 (8.3kPa); F3: n=31 (17.5kPa) and F4: n=79 (40.9kPa) (P<0.0001). LSM was correlated with the amount of fibrosis according to the Chevallier score (r=0.70, P<0.0001). LSM was correlated to fibrosis stage (tau beta, 0.53; P<0.0001) and HAH (tau beta, 0.30; P<0.0001). In multivariate analysis, fibrosis was the only parameter correlated with LSM. The areas under the ROC curve were 0.94 and 0.87 for the diagnosis of extensive fibrosis (Brunt et al. score > or =3) and cirrhosis, respectively (threshold-values: 12.9 and 22.6kPa).LSM accurately assesses extensive fibrosis and cirrhosis in alcoholic patients.Transient elastography: a valid alternative to biopsy in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography is a novel and non-invasive technique for the evaluation of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. Few studies that exist value the efficacy of transient elastography, mainly in hepatitis C virus-infected patients.To evaluate the effectiveness, objectivity, reproducibility and safety of this technique.We included 103 consecutive patients who underwent a liver biopsy in the last 48 months with a wide spectrum of chronic liver diseases. Median stiffness value (expressed as kilopascals - kPa) was kept as representative of the liver elastic modulus. All biopsy specimens were analysed by the same pathologist according to the METAVIR scoring system.Median value of stiffness in patients with mild or moderate fibrosis (FI and FII), and severe fibrosis or cirrhosis (FIII and FIV) was of 7, 4 +/- 5 and 16, 4 +/- 10 kPa, respectively, with a significant difference between them (P < 0.05). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves showed the optimal liver stiffness cut-off values for each group.We found a positive correlation between the liver stiffness found by transient elastography and fibrosis stage on biopsy in all patients, independently of the liver disease aetiology. Transient elastography is an easy, quick to perform and safe non-invasive procedure, reliable for assessing liver fibrosis.[Elastography--a new tool for diagnosis of chronic liver diseases. Might replace liver biopsy, but not always].Transient elastography as a screening tool for liver fibrosis and cirrhosis in a community-based population aged over 45 years.Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) has been used to measure fibrosis in patients with various types of chronic liver diseases. However, its usefulness as a screening procedure in apparently healthy people had not been evaluated to date.1358 subjects >45 years old from a general population attending for a medical check-up were consecutively enrolled in the study. All subjects were submitted to medical examination and laboratory tests in addition to LSM, performed on the same day by a single operator. Subjects with LSM values >8 kPa were referred to a liver unit for further investigations.168 subjects were not considered for analysis due to missing data (n=23), LSM failure (n=51) or unreliable LSM values (n=94). Among the 1190 remaining subjects, 89 (7.5%) had LSM >8 kPa including nine patients with LSM >13 kPa. Despite the fact that normal liver tests were observed in 43% of them (38 out of 89), a specific cause of chronic liver disease was found in all cases. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) was the likely cause of chronic liver disease in 52 patients, alcoholic liver disease (ALD) in 20, and both causes were associated in seven additional patients. Hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus chronic hepatitis was documented in five and four cases, respectively, and primary biliary cirrhosis in one. Liver biopsy was obtained for 27 patients, including the nine patients with LSM >13 kPa, who were diagnosed with liver cirrhosis due to ALD (n=5), chronic hepatitis C (n=3) or chronic hepatitis B (n=1). The 18 remaining biopsies showed liver fibrosis in all cases except one (isolated steatosis), with ALD and NAFLD being present in six and eight cases, respectively.LSM proved to be a useful and specific procedure to screen for cirrhosis in the general population and to detect undiagnosed chronic liver disease in apparently healthy subjects.Noninvasive markers of fibrosis and inflammation in clinical practice: prospective comparison with liver biopsy.The efficiency of transient elastography for the assessment of liver fibrosis has been evaluated mainly in patients with chronic hepatitis C and chronic hepatitis B, with few studies with nonviral chronic liver disease (CLD) such as autoimmune hepatitis, alcoholic liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In this study, we examined the value of transient elastography in a number of groups in comparison with the Fibrotest/Actitest (FT/AT), using the liver biopsy (LB) as the reference standard.An unselected and consecutive group of 65 patients had an LB either as part of an initial diagnosis or of a follow-up assessment, and in addition had a transient elastography measurement [Fibroscan (FS)] and serum blood tests FT/AT performed before the LB. The group consisted of patients diagnosed with a variety of CLD: chronic hepatitis C (n=27), chronic hepatitis B (n=8), alcoholic liver disease (n=14), autoimmune hepatitis (n=13) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (n=4).FS optimal cutoff values were 9.70 kPa for F at least 2, 13.00 kPa for F at least 3, and 16.00 kPa for F=4. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve of FS and FT for F at least 2 were 0.88 versus 0.78 in the viral CLD group and 0.81 versus 0.70 in the nonviral CLD group and 0.87 versus 0.80 in all patients. The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve for A at least 2 in all patients was 0.83. The optimal cutoff for A at least 2 was 0.50.FT/AT is a reliable method for predicting significant liver fibrosis and necroinflammation in both viral and nonviral CLD patients with a value measurement comparable with that of the FS.Liver stiffness measurement as a predictive tool of clinically significant portal hypertension in patients with compensated hepatitis C virus or alcohol-related cirrhosis.Hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) is the gold standard for assessing the presence and the severity of portal hypertension (PHT). Liver stiffness measurement (LSM) is a non-invasive method for liver fibrosis assessment.To assess the relationship between LSM and HVPG in patients with compensated cirrhosis related to hepatitis C virus (HCV) or alcohol and to define the performance and the best cut-off of LSM for the diagnosis of PHT in these patients.Between January 2004 and September 2006, we studied all the consecutive patients with compensated HCV or alcohol-related-cirrhosis referred for transjugular liver biopsy with HVPG measurement and LSM performed the same day.Ninety-two patients were eligible, 44 had HCV related-cirrhosis and 48 alcoholic cirrhosis. LSM was positively correlated to HVPG in both groups. The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for the diagnosis of significant PHT was 0.76 +/- 0.07 in HCV patients (best cut-off at 20.5 kPa) and 0.94 +/- 0.03 (best cut-off at 34.9 kPa) in alcoholic patients.Liver stiffness measurement and HVPG were significantly correlated in patients with compensated cirrhosis because of HCV infection or alcohol. LSM could predict significant PHT in both these groups of patients with a higher cut-off and a better performance in alcoholic patients.Evaluation of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging for determination of liver stiffness using transient elastography as a reference.To evaluate cut-off values and performance of acoustic radiation force impulse imaging (ARFI) using transient elastography [FibroScan© (FS)] as a reference.Six hundred and six patients were enrolled in this study. All patients underwent liver stiffness measurement with FS (FS-LS) and ARFI (with shear wave velocity quantification; ARFI-SWV) and the performance of ARFI in comparison to FS was determined. Sixty-eight patients underwent liver biopsy.Significantly higher success rates for the determination of liver stiffness were found using ARFI as compared to FS [604/606 (99.7%) vs. 482/606 (79.5%), P < 0.001]. ARFI-SWV correlated significantly with FS-LS (r = 0.920, P < 0.001). ARFI-SWV increased significantly with the stage of fibrosis (1.09 ± 0.13 m/s for patients with no significant fibrosis (FS-LS < 7.6 kPa); 1.46 ± 0.27 m/s for patients with significant liver fibrosis (7.6 < FS-LS ≤ 13.0 kPa); and 2.55 ± 0.77 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis (FS-LS > 13.0 kPa)). ARFI-SWV cut-off values were identified for no significant fibrosis (1.29 m/s; sensitivity 91.4% and specificity 92.6%) and for liver cirrhosis (1.60 m/s; sensitivity 92.3% and specificity 96.5%). The optimal cut-off value for predicting liver fibrosis (F ≥ 2) was 1.32 m/s (sensitivity 87.0% and specificity 80.0%) and for liver cirrhosis (F4) 1.62 m/s (sensitivity 100% and specificity 85.7%), for patients who underwent liver biopsy. An excellent inter-and intraobserver reproducibility was observed for ARFI-SWV determinations.An ARFI-SWV cut-off value of 1.29 m/s seems to be optimal for patients with no significant liver fibrosis and 1.60 m/s for patients with liver cirrhosis.Can transient elastography replace liver histology for determination of advanced fibrosis in alcoholic patients: a real-life study.Consensus is lacking whether cut-off values for different fibrosis stages using transient elastography (TE, FibroScan) are universally applicable to all liver diseases. We evaluated the performance of TE in predicting severe fibrosis (> or =F3) in alcoholic patients using cut-off values validated for chronic hepatitis C.Patients admitted for alcohol withdrawal were prospectively evaluated by TE and biochemistry for aspartate aminotransferase to platelet ratio index (APRI) and Forns score calculations. If TE revealed severe fibrosis (> or =F3), hepatic venous pressure gradient measurements and transjugular liver biopsy were proposed results of which were correlated and compared with TE measurements or APRI and Forns scores.Among 239 patients, 72 had liver TE scores > or =F3 and 23 declined liver biopsy leaving a final study population of 49 patients. Compared with biopsy, 32 patients were correctly classified by TE, whereas 16 patients differed by 2 fibrosis stages yielding a positive predictive value of 65% for liver fibrosis > or =F3 at TE. Specificity and sensitivity of TE improved beyond 75% and 70%, respectively, with modified cut-offs of 17 (F3) and 21.1 kPa (F4). Areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves were 0.766 and 0.864 for severe fibrosis (> or =F3) and cirrhosis, respectively. APRI and Forns scores performed less well than TE regarding sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and area under the receiver operating characteristic values. A significant correlation was found between hepatic venous pressure gradients and liver stiffness values at TE.TE with modified cut-offs has the potential to predict advanced fibrosis and significant portal hypertension in alcoholic patients. APRI and Forns scores are of limited usefulness in alcoholics.Applicability and variability of liver stiffness measurements according to probe position.To investigate the liver stiffness measurement (LSM) applicability and variability with reference to three probe positions according to the region of liver biopsy.The applicability for LSM was defined as at least 10 valid measurements with a success rate greater than 60% and an interquartile range/median LSM < 30%. The LSM variability compared the inter-position concordance and the concordance with FibroTest.Four hundred and forty two consecutive patients were included. The applicability of the anterior position (81%) was significantly higher than that of the reference (69%) and lower positions (68%), (both P = 0.0001). There was a significant difference (0.5 kPa, 95% CI 0.13-0.89; P < 0.0001) between mean LSM estimated at the reference position (9.3 kPa) vs the anterior position (8.8 kPa). Discordance between positions was associated with thoracic fold (P = 0.008). The discordance rate between the reference position result and FibroTest was higher when the 7.1 kPa cutoff was used to define advanced fibrosis instead of 8.8 kPa (33.6% vs 23.5%, P = 0.03).The anterior position of the probe should be the first choice for LSM using Fibroscan, as it has a higher applicability without higher variability compared to the usual liver biopsy position.Variant adiponutrin (PNPLA3) represents a common fibrosis risk gene: non-invasive elastography-based study in chronic liver disease.Recent genome-wide association studies have identified the variant p.I148M of the adiponutrin gene PNPLA3 as a risk factor for developing severe forms of non-alcoholic and alcoholic liver diseases. The risk allele confers an increased risk for fatty liver disease and elevated serum aminotransferase activities reflecting liver injury. In the current elastography-based study, we investigate variant adiponutrin as genetic determinant of liver fibrosis, the hallmark of all chronic liver diseases.In this observational cross-sectional study, we staged 899 patients with different chronic liver diseases non-invasively by transient elastography (Fibroscan) and genotyped them for variant adiponutrin (rs738409) by PCR-based assays. A subgroup of 229 patients consented to percutaneous liver biopsy, validating the accuracy of elastography in staging fibrosis (ρ=0.743, p<0.01).Carriers of distinct p.I148M adiponutrin genotypes display significant (p=0.017) differences in liver stiffness determined by elastography. In particular, individuals carrying the allele [G] are at higher risk of developing liver cirrhosis defined by stiffness values ≥13.0kPa (OR=1.56, p=0.005). Of note, the PNPLA3 risk variant advances fibrosis in the total cohort as well as in the subgroups of patients with viral hepatitis and non-viral liver diseases and contributes 16% of the total cirrhosis risk.The adiponutrin risk variant is a common genetic determinant of progressive liver fibrosis. Our results underpin non-invasive follow-up for individuals with chronic liver disease at-risk for developing advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis.Evaluation of liver fibrosis by transient elastography using acoustic radiation force impulse: comparison with Fibroscan(®).Accurate evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver damage is required to determine the appropriate treatment. Various approaches, including laboratory tests and transient elastography, have been used to evaluate liver fibrosis. Recently, transient elastography with acoustic radiation force impulse (ARFI) has been developed and applied with conventional ultrasonography. The aim of this study was to evaluate the clinical utility of transient elastography with ARFI and to compare the results with this method and those of the Fibroscan(®) procedure.One hundred and thirty-one patients with liver damage, who underwent liver biopsy at our department, were enrolled prospectively in this study. Elastography with ARFI (applied with ACUSON S2000(®)), and Fibroscan(®) was performed at the same time as liver biopsy. These measurements were compared with histological findings in liver biopsy specimens, and measurement accuracy was evaluated by receiver-operating characteristic analysis.Elastography values with both procedures were significantly correlated with the stages of liver fibrosis and there was little difference in the results obtained using the 2 procedures. The accuracy of differential diagnosis between no fibrosis at F0 and more than F1 stage was insufficient with ARFI, but this procedure was sufficient for diagnosing advanced fibrosis. The accuracy of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method. Moreover, both ARFI and Fibroscan(®) values increased in proportion to the severity of hepatic inflammation when fibrosis stage is low, but not in proportion to the severity of steatosis.Transient elastography with ARFI is simple, non-invasive and useful for diagnosing the stage of fibrosis in chronic liver disease. The utility of ARFI was almost equivalent to that of the Fibroscan(®) method.Reproducibility of transient elastography in the evaluation of liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease.Transient elastography (TE) is gaining popularity as a non-invasive method for predicting liver fibrosis, but intraobserver and interobserver agreement and factors influencing TE reproducibility have not been adequately assessed. This study investigated these aspects.Tertiary referral liver unit.Over a 4-month period, 200 patients with chronic liver disease (CLD) with varying aetiology consecutively underwent TE and liver biopsy.TE was performed twice by two different operators either concomitantly or within 3 days of the bioptic procedure (METAVIR classification).Intraobserver and interobserver agreement were analysed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) and correlated with different patient-related and liver disease-related covariates.800 TE examinations were performed, with an indeterminate result rate of 2.4%. The overall interobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 (95% CI 0.977 to 0.987). Increased body mass index (>25 kg/m(2)), steatosis, and low staging grades (fibrosis (F) stage <2) were significantly associated with reduced ICC (p<0.05). Intraobserver agreement ICC was 0.98 for both raters. Using receiver operating characteristic curves, three diagnostic TE thresholds were identified: >7.9 kPa for F>/=2, >10.3 for F>/=3 and >11.9 for F = 4. TE values assessed by the two raters fell within the same cut-off of fibrosis in 88% of the cases for F>/=2, in 92% for F>/=3 and 91% for F = 4.TE is a highly reproducible and user-friendly technique for assessing liver fibrosis in patients with CLD. However, because TE reproducibility is significantly reduced (p<0.05) in patients with steatosis, increased BMI and lower degrees of hepatic fibrosis, caution is warranted in the clinical use of TE as a surrogate for liver biopsy.Transient elastography for predicting clinical outcomes in patients with chronic liver disease.There is increasing interest in developing noninvasive means to evaluate liver fibrosis in patients with chronic liver disease to determine disease severity, prognosis and optimal treatment. Transient elastography (TE) has previously been demonstrated to predict the presence or absence of advanced fibrosis. The current study was conducted to determine whether TE can identify patients with chronic liver disease at risk of clinical decompensation. A total of 667 patients underwent TE and were followed for a median of 861 days and 57 patients achieved the primary outcome, a composite of clinical endpoints including death, ascites, encephalopathy, increased Child Score ≥ 2, variceal bleed, hepatocellular carcinoma or listing for transplant. Overall, TE had an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.87 for predicting clinical outcome. Using a cut-off of 10.5 kPa, TE has a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value (NPV) of 94.7%, 63.0%, 19.3% and 99.2%, respectively. A predictive model for clinical events was developed using generalized cross-validation for clinical endpoints considering TE, liver biopsy results and multiple other predictors. Individually, TE performed better than biopsy, or any other variable, for predicting clinical outcome [Harrell's C Statistic 0.86 for TE, 0.78 for stage]. Patients with a TE score of >12.5 kPa were found to have a relative hazard for clinical event of 18.99 compared with patients with TE score <10.5. A combined variable model including TE, aspartate aminotransferase/alanine aminotransferase ratio and model for end-stage liver disease (MELD) yielded the highest predictive accuracy with Harrell's C value of 0.93. In the subset of patients with cirrhosis, TE was not found to be independently associated with clinical outcomes in univariate or multivariate analysis although it retained a high sensitivity and NPV of 97.5% and 92.3%, respectively, at a kPa cut-off of 10.5. TE can successfully identify patients with chronic liver disease who are at low risk of clinical decompensation over a time period of 2 years.[The usefulness of transient elastography to diagnose cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease].It is not easy to differentiate between patients with cirrhosis and those with alcoholic liver disease. Liver biopsy is generally considered the gold standard for assessing hepatic fibrosis; however, this protocol frequently carries a risk of severe complications and false-negative results. Transient elastography (Fibroscan, Echosens, Paris, France), which is a noninvasive method of measuring liver stiffness, has become available for assessing liver fibrosis. Liver stiffness reportedly differs markedly with the cirrhosis etiology. The aim of this study was thus to determine the diagnostic accuracy of the Fibroscan in the detection of cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease.We enrolled 45 patients with alcoholic liver disease. Fibroscan, abdominal ultrasonography, aspartate aminotransferase/platelet ratio index (APRI), and liver biopsy were performed on all patients. Fibrosis stage was assessed using the Batts-Ludwig scoring system.The stage of fibrosis (F1-F4) was distributed among the cohort as follows: 5 patients at F1, 4 patients at F2, 7 patients at F3, and 29 patients at F4. Liver stiffness differed significantly between each fibrosis stage (P<0.001). For the diagnosis of cirrhosis, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was 0.97 for transient elastography (95% confidence interval, CI, 0.93-1.01), 0.81 for ultrasonography (95% CI, 0.68-0.94), and 0.83 for APRI score (95% CI, 0.70-0.95). The optimal cut-off value of liver stiffness for detecting cirrhosis was 25.8 kPa, with a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity of 87%.Transient elastography is a useful method for diagnosing cirrhosis in patients with alcoholic liver disease.