Lay support for pregnant women with social risk: a randomised controlled trial.We sought evidence of effectiveness of lay support to improve maternal and child outcomes in disadvantaged families.Prospective, pragmatic, individually randomised controlled trial.3 Maternity Trusts in West Midlands, UK.Following routine midwife systematic assessment of social risk factors, 1324 nulliparous women were assigned, using telephone randomisation, to standard maternity care, or addition of referral to a Pregnancy Outreach Worker (POW) service. Those under 16 years and teenagers recruited to the Family Nurse Partnership trial were excluded.POWs were trained to provide individual support and case management for the women including home visiting from randomisation to 6 weeks after birth. Standard maternity care (control) included provision for referring women with social risk factors to specialist midwifery services, available to both arms.Primary outcomes were antenatal visits attended and Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) 8-12 weeks postpartum. Prespecified, powered, subgroup comparison was among women with 2 or more social risks. Secondary outcomes included maternal and neonatal birth outcomes; maternal self-efficacy, and mother-to-infant bonding at 8-12 weeks; child development assessment at 6 weeks, breastfeeding at 6 weeks, and immunisation uptake at 4 months, all collected from routine child health systems.Antenatal attendances were high in the standard care control and did not increase further with addition of the POW intervention (10.1 vs 10.1 (mean difference; MD) -0.00, 95% CI (95% CI -0.37 to 0.37)). In the powered subgroup of women with 2 or more social risk factors, mean EPDS (MD -0.79 (95% CI -1.56 to -0.02) was significantly better, although for all women recruited, no significant differences were seen (MD -0.59 (95% CI -1.24 to 0.06). Mother-to-infant bonding was significantly better in the intervention group for all women (MD -0.30 (95% CI -0.61 to -0.00) p=0.05), and there were no differences in other secondary outcomes.This trial demonstrates differences in depressive symptomatology with addition of the POW service in the powered subgroup of women with 2 or more social risk factors. Addition to existing evidence indicates benefit from lay interventions in preventing postnatal depression. This finding is important for women and their families given the known effect of maternal depression on longer term childhood outcomes.ISRCTN35027323; Results.The effects of postnatal health education for mothers on infant care and family planning practices in Nepal: a randomised controlled trial.To evaluate impact of postnatal health education for mothers on infant care and postnatal family planning practices in Nepal.Randomised controlled trial with community follow up at 3 and 6 months post partum by interview. Initial household survey of study areas to identify all pregnant women to facilitate follow up.Main maternity hospital in Kathmandu, Nepal. Follow up in urban Kathmandu and a periurban area southwest of the city.540 mothers randomly allocated to one of four groups: health education immediately after birth and three months later (group A), at birth only (group B), at three months only (group C), or none (group D).Structured baseline household questionnaire; 20 minute, one to one health education at birth and three months later.Duration of exclusive breast feeding, appropriate immunisation of infant, knowledge of oral rehydration solution and need to continue breast feeding in diarrhoea, knowledge of infant signs suggesting pneumonia, uptake of postnatal family planning.Mothers in groups A and B (received health education at birth) were slightly more likely to use contraception at six months after birth compared with mothers in groups C and D (no health education at birth) (odds ratio 1.62, 95% confidence interval 1.06 to 2.5). There were no other significant differences between groups with regards to infant feeding, infant care, or immunisation.Our findings suggest that the recommended practice of individual health education for postnatal mothers in poor communities has no impact on infant feeding, care, or immunisation, although uptake of family planning may be slightly enhanced.Community resource centres to improve the health of women and children in Mumbai slums: study protocol for a cluster randomized controlled trial.The trial addresses the general question of whether community resource centers run by a non-government organization improve the health of women and children in slums. The resource centers will be run by the Society for Nutrition, Education and Health Action, and the trial will evaluate their effects on a series of public health indicators. Each resource center will be located in a vulnerable Mumbai slum area and will serve as a base for salaried community workers, supervised by officers and coordinators, to organize the collection and dissemination of health information, provision of services, home visits to identify and counsel families at risk, referral of individuals and families to appropriate services and support for their access, meetings of community members and providers, and events and campaigns on health issues.A cluster randomized controlled trial in which 20 urban slum areas with resource centers are compared with 20 control areas. Each cluster will contain approximately 600 households and randomized allocation will be in three blocked phases, of 12, 12 and 16 clusters. Any resident of an intervention cluster will be able to participate in the intervention, but the resource centers will target women and children, particularly women of reproductive age and children under 5.The outcomes will be assessed through a household census after 2 years of resource center operations. The primary outcomes are unmet need for family planning in women aged 15 to 49 years, proportion of children under 5 years of age not fully immunized for their ages, and proportion of children under 5 years of age with weight for height less than 2 standard deviations below the median for age and sex. Secondary outcomes describe adolescent pregnancies, home deliveries, receipt of conditional cash transfers for institutional delivery, other childhood anthropometric indices, use of public sector health and nutrition services, indices of infant and young child feeding, and consultation for violence against women and children.ISRCTN Register: ISRCTN56183183Clinical Trials Registry of India: CTRI/2012/09/003004.Randomized controlled trial to improve childhood immunization adherence in rural Pakistan: redesigned immunization card and maternal education. A substantial dropout from the first dose of diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis (DTP1) to the 3rd dose of DTP (DTP3) immunization has been recorded in Pakistan. We conducted a randomized controlled trial to assess the effects of providing a substantially redesigned immunization card, centre-based education, or both interventions together on DTP3 completion at six rural expanded programme on immunization (EPI) centres in Pakistan.Mother-child pairs were enrolled at DTP1 and randomized to four study groups: redesigned card, centre-based education, combined intervention and standard care. Each child was followed up for 90 days to record the dates of DTP2 and DTP3 visits. The study outcome was DTP3 completion by the end of follow-up period in each study group.We enrolled 378 mother-child pairs in redesigned card group, 376 in centre-based education group, 374 in combined intervention group and 378 in standard care group. By the end of follow-up, 39% of children in standard care group completed DTP3. Compared to this, a significantly higher proportion of children completed DTP3 in redesigned card group (66%) (crude risk ratio [RR] = 1.7; 95% CI = 1.5, 2.0), centre-based education group (61%) (RR = 1.5; 95% CI = 1.3, 1.8) and combined intervention group (67%) (RR = 1.7; 95% CI = 1.4, 2.0).Improved immunization card alone, education to mothers alone, or both together were all effective in increasing follow-up immunization visits. The study underscores the potential of study interventions' public health impact and necessitates their evaluation for complete EPI schedule at a large scale in the EPI system.Effects of Community Health Nurse-Led Intervention on Childhood Routine Immunization Completion in Primary Health Care Centers in Ibadan, Nigeria.Immunization coverage of vulnerable children is often sub-optimal in many low- and middle-income countries. The use of a reminder/recall (R/R) system has been one of the strategies shown to be effective in improving immunization rates. In the resent study, we evaluated the effect of R/R and Primary Health Care Immunization Providers' Training (PHCIPT) intervention on routine immunization completion among 595 infants in Ibadan, Nigeria. The design was a group randomized controlled trial with Local Government Area (LGA) being the unit of randomization. Four randomly selected LGAs were randomized to receive a cellphone R/R only (A), a PHCIPT only (B); combined R/R and PHCIPT (C) intervention or serve as a control group (D). Children aged 0-12 weeks were consecutively recruited into each group and followed up for 12 months. The primary outcome measure was routine immunization completion at 12 months of age. At the study endpoint, immunization completion rates were: group A, 98.6 %; group B, 70 %; group C, 97.3 %; and group D, 57.3 %. Compared to the control group, the cellphone R/R group was 72 % (RR 1.72, 95 % CI 1.50-1.98) and the combined RR/PHCIPT group 70 % (RR 1.70, 95 % CI 1.47-1.95) more likely to complete immunization. In contrast, immunization completion in the PHCIPT group was marginally different from the control group (RR 1.22, 95 % CI 1.03-1.45). These findings remained robust to adjustment for potential predictors of immunization completion as covariates. In conclusion, cellphone reminder/recall was effective in improving immunization completion in this Nigerian setting. Its use is recommended for large scale implementation.Redesigned immunization card and center-based education to reduce childhood immunization dropouts in urban Pakistan: a randomized controlled trial.In Pakistan during 2000-2004, about 11-13% of children who received the first dose of diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT1) failed to complete its third dose (DPT3). We assessed the effect of a redesigned immunization card and center-based education to mothers on DPT3 completion. We enrolled 1500 mother-child units at DPT1, randomized them to three intervention and one standard care groups, and recorded their DPT3 visits during a 90-day follow-up. In multivariable analysis, a significant increase of 31% (adjusted RR=1.31, 95% CI=1.18-1.46) in DPT3 completion was estimated in the group that received both redesigned card and center-based education compared with the standard care group.Assessment of parent education methods for infant immunization.To assess whether a video about infant immunization could inform parents as well as human counselling (oral presentation).Core information for parents about infant immunization was identified and packaged in an instructional video and a scripted oral presentation. Volunteer prenatal classes were randomly assigned a video or oral presentation. Participants completed pre- and post-test questionnaires covering the same 16 items. Scores were compared for each question and as a group means, using Fisher's exact test, 2-sided.227 subjects participated, including 102 men and 124 women. Groups were similar in terms of gender mix, parenting experience and recent reading about immunization. Pre-test knowledge scores were similarly low between groups. Post-test scores were much higher but did not differ significantly between groups.In a prenatal classroom setting, video and oral presentations were equally effective in conveying key information about infant immunization.Randomised cluster trial to support informed parental decision-making for the MMR vaccine.In the UK public concern about the safety of the combined measles, mumps and rubella [MMR] vaccine continues to impact on MMR coverage. Whilst the sharp decline in uptake has begun to level out, first and second dose uptake rates remain short of that required for population immunity. Furthermore, international research consistently shows that some parents lack confidence in making a decision about MMR vaccination for their children. Together, this work suggests that effective interventions are required to support parents to make informed decisions about MMR. This trial assessed the impact of a parent-centred, multi-component intervention (balanced information, group discussion, coaching exercise) on informed parental decision-making for MMR.This was a two arm, cluster randomised trial. One hundred and forty two UK parents of children eligible for MMR vaccination were recruited from six primary healthcare centres and six childcare organisations. The intervention arm received an MMR information leaflet and participated in the intervention (parent meeting). The control arm received the leaflet only. The primary outcome was decisional conflict. Secondary outcomes were actual and intended MMR choice, knowledge, attitude, concern and necessity beliefs about MMR and anxiety.Decisional conflict decreased for both arms to a level where an 'effective' MMR decision could be made one-week (effect estimate = -0.54, p < 0.001) and three-months (effect estimate = -0.60, p < 0.001) post-intervention. There was no significant difference between arms (effect estimate = 0.07, p = 0.215). Heightened decisional conflict was evident for parents making the MMR decision for their first child (effect estimate = -0.25, p = 0.003), who were concerned (effect estimate = 0.07, p < 0.001), had less positive attitudes (effect estimate = -0.20, p < 0.001) yet stronger intentions (effect estimate = 0.09, p = 0.006). Significantly more parents in the intervention arm reported vaccinating their child (93% versus 73%, p = 0.04).Whilst both the leaflet and the parent meeting reduced parents' decisional conflict, the parent meeting appeared to enable parents to act upon their decision leading to vaccination uptake.Risk Communication, Values Clarification, and Vaccination Decisions.Many health-related decisions require choosing between two options, each with risks and benefits. When presented with such tradeoffs, people often make choices that fail to align with scientific evidence or with their own values. This study tested whether risk communication and values clarification methods could help parents and guardians make evidence-based, values-congruent decisions about children's influenza vaccinations. In 2013-2014 we conducted an online 2×2 factorial experiment in which a diverse sample of U.S. parents and guardians (n = 407) were randomly assigned to view either standard information about influenza vaccines or risk communication using absolute and incremental risk formats. Participants were then either presented or not presented with an interactive values clarification interface with constrained sliders and dynamic visual feedback. Participants randomized to the risk communication condition combined with the values clarification interface were more likely to indicate intentions to vaccinate (β = 2.10, t(399) = 2.63, p < 0.01). The effect was particularly notable among participants who had previously demonstrated less interest in having their children vaccinated against influenza (β = -2.14, t(399) = -2.06, p < 0.05). When assessing vaccination status reported by participants who agreed to participate in a follow-up study six months later (n = 116), vaccination intentions significantly predicted vaccination status (OR = 1.66, 95%CI (1.13, 2.44), p < 0.05) and rates of informed choice (OR = 1.51, 95%CI (1.07, 2.13), p < 0.012), although there were no direct effects of experimental factors on vaccination rates. Qualitative analysis suggested that logistical barriers impeded immunization rates. Risk communication and values clarification methods may contribute to increased vaccination intentions, which may, in turn, predict vaccination status if logistical barriers are also addressed. Cluster randomized trial of a toolkit and early vaccine delivery to improve childhood influenza vaccination rates in primary care.To increase childhood influenza vaccination rates using a toolkit and early vaccine delivery in a randomized cluster trial.Twenty primary care practices treating children (range for n=536-8183) were randomly assigned to Intervention and Control arms to test the effectiveness of an evidence-based practice improvement toolkit (4 Pillars Toolkit) and early vaccine supplies for use among disadvantaged children on influenza vaccination rates among children 6 months-18 years. Follow-up staff meetings and surveys were used to assess use and acceptability of the intervention strategies in the Intervention arm. Rates for the 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 influenza seasons were compared. Two-level generalized linear mixed modeling was used to evaluate outcomes.Overall increases in influenza vaccination rates were significantly greater in the Intervention arm (7.9 percentage points) compared with the Control arm (4.4 percentage points; P<0.034). These rate changes represent 4522 additional doses in the Intervention arm vs. 1390 additional doses in the Control arm. This effect of the intervention was observed despite the fact that rates increased significantly in both arms - 8/10 Intervention (all P<0.001) and 7/10 Control sites (P-values=0.04 to <0.001). Rates in two Intervention sites with pre-intervention vaccination rates >58% did not significantly increase. In regression analyses, a child's likelihood of being vaccinated was significantly higher with: younger age, white race (Odds ratio [OR]=1.29; 95% confidence interval [CI]=1.23-1.34), having commercial insurance (OR=1.30; 95%CI=1.25-1.35), higher pre-intervention practice vaccination rate (OR=1.25; 95%CI=1.16-1.34), and being in the Intervention arm (OR=1.23; 95%CI=1.01-1.50). Early delivery of influenza vaccine was rated by Intervention practices as an effective strategy for raising rates.Implementation of a multi-strategy toolkit and early vaccine supplies can significantly improve influenza vaccination rates among children in primary care practices but the effect may be less pronounced in practices with moderate to high existing vaccination rates. Clinical trial registry name/number: From Innovation to Solutions: Childhood Influenza/NCT01664793.Postnatal home visits in teenage mothers: a randomised controlled trial.Teenage pregnancies are associated with negative socioeconomic effects. Our aim was to ascertain whether a postnatal home-visiting service for teenage mothers younger than age 18 years could reduce the frequency of adverse neonatal outcomes and improve knowledge of contraception, breastfeeding, and infant vaccination schedules in this parent group.We enrolled 139 adolescents, attending a teenage pregnancy clinic, in a randomised controlled trial. After completing an antenatal questionnaire designed to assess their knowledge of contraception, infant vaccination, and breastfeeding, we assigned participants to either receive five structured postnatal home visits by nurse-midwives (n=65) or not (n=71). Assessment interviews were done 6 months postpartum. Our primary endpoint was unadjusted difference in knowledge between groups, and incidence of predefined adverse neonatal outcomes. Analysis was by intention to treat.Three women withdrew before randomisation because of late fetal loss, 11 mothers withdrew because of adverse neonatal outcomes (adverse neonatal outcome was a primary endpoint, but resulted in withdrawal from the study for knowledge outcomes), and one left voluntarily. Follow-up data were, therefore, available for 124 teenagers. Postnatal home visits were associated with a reduction in adverse neonatal outcomes (intervention: 2; control: 9; relative risk 0.24, 95% CI 0.05-1.08), and a significant increase in contraception knowledge (mean difference 0.92, 95% CI 0.32-1.52). However, there was no significant increase in knowledge with respect to breastfeeding or infant vaccination schedules associated with the home visits.Postnatal home-visiting services by nurse-midwives reduce adverse neonatal events and improve contraception outcomes, but do not affect breastfeeding or infant vaccination knowledge or compliance.Reducing missed opportunities to vaccinate during child health visits. How effective are parent education and case management?At child health visits, immunizations that are due are frequently not given. Increased parent understanding of and demand for immunizations may influence providers to not miss these opportunities.To assess, as part of a larger study of effectiveness of parent education and case management (CM) in raising immunization rates, the intervention's effectiveness at reducing missed opportunities to vaccinate during child health visits.A representative sample of African American newborns and their families from south central Los Angeles, Calif, were randomly assigned to a control or a CM group and observed during the first year of life. Case managers visited and telephoned parents, educating them on the benefits and safety of immunizations, and encouraging them to request immunizations from providers. When the children were at least 1 year of age, parents were interviewed and provider records were abstracted.Complete records were abstracted for 126 controls and 129 CM group children. For these children, 1092 visits were documented where immunizations were due. Missed opportunities to vaccinate occurred at more than 50% of visits. Case management was associated with a modest reduction in the percentage of visits with missed opportunities in the bivariate analysis but not after adjustment for other covariates. In a logistic regression model, missed opportunities were more frequent at visits with private than public physicians and at acute illness than well-child visits. Missed opportunities were less frequent among children with a history of at least 1 cancelled appointment, and for visits of children with mothers who smoked.Missed opportunities were minimally influenced by a home visitation and parent education program. They are primarily determined by issues under the control of the provider. Family- and child-related characteristics, however, do influence the likelihood of a missed opportunity occurring independent of provider factors.Encouraging Influenza Vaccination Among Text4baby Pregnant Women and Mothers.Pregnant women, postpartum women, and infants are at high risk for complications from influenza. From October to November 2012, Text4baby, a free national text service for pregnant women and mothers of infants aged <1 year, implemented a module of interactive messages encouraging maternal influenza vaccination. A program evaluation examined whether a text-based reminder or tailored education improved self-reported influenza vaccination or intent to be vaccinated later in the influenza season among Text4baby participants.Nearly one third (28,609/89,792) of enrollees responded to a text asking about their vaccination plans. Those planning to receive vaccination were randomly assigned to receive an encouragement message or an encouragement message plus the opportunity to schedule a reminder (n=3,021 at follow-up). Those not planning to be vaccinated were randomly assigned to receive general education or education tailored to their reason for non-vaccination (n=3,820 at follow-up). The effect of the enhanced messages was assessed using multinomial logistic regression in 2013-2014.A reminder increased the odds of vaccination at follow-up among mothers (AOR=2.0, 95% CI=1.4, 2.9) and of continued intent to be vaccinated later in the season (pregnant, AOR=2.1, 95% CI=1.4, 3.1; mother, AOR=1.7, 95% CI=1.1, 2.5). Among mothers not planning to be vaccinated because of cost, those who received a tailored message about low-cost vaccination had higher odds of vaccination at follow-up (AOR=1.9, 95% CI=1.1, 3.5). Other tailored messages were not effective.Text reminders and tailored education may encourage influenza vaccination among this vulnerable population; both have now been incorporated into Text4baby.A randomized trial to increase acceptance of childhood vaccines by vaccine-hesitant parents: a pilot study.A cluster randomized trial was performed to evaluate an educational intervention to improve parental attitudes and vaccine uptake in vaccine-hesitant parents.Two primary care sites were randomized to provide families with either usual care or an intervention (video and written information) for vaccine-hesitant parents. Eligible parents included those presenting for their child's 2-week well-child visit with performance on the Parent Attitudes about Childhood Vaccines (PACV) survey suggesting vaccine hesitancy (score ≥25). Enrollees completed PACV surveys at the 2-month well-child visit and vaccination status at 12 weeks of age was assessed. The primary outcome was the difference in PACV scores obtained at enrollment and 2 months between the 2 groups. The proportion of on-time vaccination was also compared at 12 weeks.A total of 454 parents were approached, and 369 (81.3%) participated; 132 had PACV scores of ≥25 and were enrolled, 67 in the control group (mean PACV score 37) and 55 in the intervention group (mean PACV score 40). Two-month PACV surveys were completed by 108 (∼90%) of enrollees. Parents in the intervention group had a significant decrease in PACV score at 2 months compared to control (median difference 6.7, P = .049); this remained significant after adjustment for baseline PACV score, race/ethnicity, and income (P = .044). There was no difference in the on-time receipt of vaccines between groups at 12 weeks.A brief educational intervention for vaccine-hesitant parents was associated with a modest but significant increase in measured parental attitudes toward vaccines.Perinatal immunization education improves immunization rates and knowledge: a randomized controlled trial.To determine if providing perinatal immunization education positively changes the immunization status of infants, influences the infant immunization knowledge, attitudes and beliefs of mothers and affects the intent to vaccinate children in Japan where immunization education is limited.Pregnant women were recruited from three sites in Tokyo, Japan and were assigned to two intervention (pre- or postnatal education) groups and a control group. The immunization status of infants was assessed and a written survey was performed before and after the intervention.Among 119 study participants, 106 subjects replied to the post-survey. The intervention groups (34.3%) had higher immunization rates in infants at three months of age than the control group (8.3%) (P=0.005); however, no differences were observed between the prenatal (29.4%) and postnatal groups (38.9%) (P=0.40). The percentage of women intended to vaccinate their infants was higher in the intervention groups (61.4%) compared to the control group (33.3%) (P=0.01). The improvement in score for basic knowledge was higher in the intervention groups, particularly in the prenatal group (mean±S.D.: 3.4±1.8) compared to the control (1.9±1.9) (P=0.003).Perinatal immunization education improved the immunization status of infants, increased the women's knowledge on immunization and intention to vaccinate their infants.Infant health effects of a nurse-community health worker home visitation programme: a randomized controlled trial. Home visiting is supported as a way to improve child health and development. Home visiting has been usually provided by nurses or community health workers (CHWs). Few studies compared the child health advantages of a nurse-CHW team approach over nurse prenatal and postnatal home visiting. A randomized trial was conducted with Medicaid-insured pregnant women in Kent County, Michigan. Pregnant women were assigned to a team intervention including nurse-CHW home visitation, or standard community care (CC) including nurse home visitation. Morbidity was assessed in 530 infants over their first 12 months of life from medical claims and reported by the mother. There were no differences in overall child health between the nurse-CHW intervention and the CC arm over the first year of life. There were fewer mother-reported asthma/wheezing/croup diagnostics in the team intervention group among infants whose mothers have low psychosocial resources (13% vs. 27%, P = 0.01; adjusted OR = 0.4, P = 0.01). There were no differences in diagnosed asthma/wheezing/croup documented by medical claims. There were no differences in immunizations, hospitalizations and ear infections. There was no strong evidence that infant health was improved by the addition of CHWs to a programme of CC that included nurse home visitation. Targeting such interventions at common health problems of infancy and childhood or at diagnosed chronic conditions may prove more successful.An enriched medical home intervention using community health workers improves adherence to immunization schedules.Disparities in childhood vaccination rates persist.To evaluate the impact of an enriched medical home intervention using community health workers on improving immunization adherence among young children.The intervention group received home visits from trained community health workers to support families in adhering to recommended care while the comparison group received usual care (i.e. no home visits/reminders). Immunization history and socio-demographic data were collected using medical records and a validated questionnaire. The doubly robust estimation of risk difference, which combines weighting via propensity score and outcome regression model, was used to compare immunization adherence rates between two groups.Primary care practices affiliated with a suburban tertiary care academic medical center serving a socioeconomically diverse population.The study sample included children ≤ 2 years of age at enrollment who crossed at least one age time point of 3, 7, 15, or 24 months during their 6 months post-enrollment period.The primary outcome was age-specific immunization up-to-date status defined by CDC guidelines. The primary predictor was participation in the intervention.The analysis included 201 children in the usual care group and 110 children in the intervention group. The usual care and intervention groups were divided into subgroups of newborn and infant/toddler to account for prior immunization history. After adjusting for differences in group characteristics, we found a significant absolute increase in the up-to-date immunization likelihood for both newborns (20.9%, p=0.01) and infants/toddlers (16.8%, p=0.01) receiving the intervention when compared to their peers receiving usual clinical care.Our findings demonstrate the positive impact of an enriched medical home intervention using community health worker home visitation on early childhood immunization up-to-date status. With further study, this model may provide a cost-effective approach to improving childhood vaccination rates, especially for vulnerable groups.Evaluation of Lay Support in Pregnant women with Social risk (ELSIPS): a randomised controlled trial.Maternal, neonatal and child health outcomes are worse in families from black and ethnic minority groups and disadvantaged backgrounds. There is little evidence on whether lay support improves maternal and infant outcomes among women with complex social needs within a disadvantaged multi-ethnic population in the United Kingdom (UK).The aim of this study is to evaluate a lay Pregnancy Outreach Worker (POW) service for nulliparous women identified as having social risk within a maternity service that is systematically assessing social risks alongside the usual obstetric and medical risks. The study design is a randomised controlled trial (RCT) in nulliparous women assessed as having social risk comparing standard maternity care with the addition of referral to the POW support service. The POWs work alongside community midwifery teams and offer individualised support to women to encourage engagement with services (health and social care) from randomisation (before 28 weeks gestation) until 6 weeks after birth. The primary outcomes have been chosen on the basis that they are linked to maternal and infant health. The two primary outcomes are engagement with antenatal care, assessed by the number of antenatal visits; and maternal depression, assessed using the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale at 8-12 weeks after birth. Secondary outcomes include maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality, routine child health assessments, including immunisation uptake and breastfeeding at 6 weeks. Other psychological outcomes (self efficacy) and mother-to-infant bonding will also be collected using validated tools.A sample size of 1316 will provide 90% power (at the 5% significance level) to detect increased engagement with antenatal services of 1.5 visits and a reduction of 1.5 in the average EPDS score for women with two or more social risk factors, with power in excess of this for women with any social risk factor. Analysis will be by intention to treat. Qualitative research will explore the POWs' daily work in context. This will complement the findings of the RCT through a triangulation of quantitative and qualitative data on the process of the intervention, and identify other contextual factors that affect the implementation of the intervention.The trial will provide high quality evidence as to whether or not lay support (POW) offered to women identified with social risk factors improves engagement with maternity services and reduces numbers of women with depression. MREC NUMBER: 10/H1207/23ISRCTN: ISRCTN35027323.Interventions to increase immunisation coverage among children 12-23 months of age in India through participatory learning and community engagement: pilot study for a cluster randomised trial.With the aim of conducting a future cluster randomised trial to assess intervention impact on child vaccination coverage, we designed a pilot study to assess feasibility and aid in refining methods for the larger study.Cluster-randomised design with a 1:1 allocation ratio.Clusters were 12 villages in rural Uttar Pradesh. All women residing in a selected village who were mothers of a child 0-23 months of age were eligible; participants were chosen at random. Over 4 months, intervention group (IG) villages received: (1) home visits by volunteers; (2) community mobilisation events to promote immunisation. Control group (CG) villages received community mobilisation to promote nutrition. A toll-free number for immunisation was offered to all IG and CG village residents. Primary outcomes were ex-ante criteria for feasibility of the main study related to processes for recruitment and randomisation (50% of villages would agree to participate and accept randomisation; 30 women could be recruited in 70% of villages), and retention of participants (50% of women retained from baseline to endline). Clusters were assigned to IG or CG using a computer-generated randomisation schedule. Neither participants nor those delivering interventions were blinded, but those assessing outcomes were blinded to group assignment.All villages contacted agreed to participate and accepted randomisation. 36 women were recruited per village; 432 participants were randomised (IG n=216; CG n=216). No clusters were lost to follow-up. The main analysis included 86% (373/432) of participants, 90% (195/216) from the IG and 82% (178/216) from the CG.Criteria related to feasibility were satisfied, giving us confidence that we can successfully conduct a larger cluster randomised trial. Methodological lessons will inform design of the main study.ISRCTN16703097.Medical-Legal Strategies to Improve Infant Health Care: A Randomized Trial.Changes in health care delivery create opportunities to improve systems to better meet the needs of low-income families while achieving quality benchmarks.Families of healthy newborns receiving primary care at a single large urban safety-net hospital participated. Intervention families were randomly assigned a family specialist who provided support until the 6-month routine health care visit. The Developmental Understanding and Legal Collaboration for Everyone (DULCE) intervention is based on the Strengthening Families approach and incorporated components of the Healthy Steps and Medical-Legal Partnership models. Medical record reviews determined use of preventive and emergency care. Surveys conducted at baseline, postintervention (6 months), and follow-up (12 months) were used to determine hardship and attainment of concrete supports.Three hundred thirty families participated in the study. At baseline, 73% of families reported economic hardships. Intervention parents had an average of 14 contacts with the family specialist, and 5 hours of total contact time. Intervention infants were more likely to have completed their 6-month immunization schedule by age 7 months (77% vs 63%, P < .005) and by 8 months (88% vs 77%, P < .01). Intervention infants were more likely to have 5 or more routine preventive care visits by age 1 year (78% vs 67%, P < .01) and were less likely to have visited the emergency department by age 6 months (37% vs 49.7%, P < .03). The DULCE intervention accelerated access to concrete resources (P = .029).Assignment to the Project DULCE intervention led to improvements in preventive health care delivery and utilization and accelerated access to concrete supports among low-income families.Physician Communication Training and Parental Vaccine Hesitancy: A Randomized Trial.Physicians have a major influence on parental vaccine decisions. We tested a physician-targeted communication intervention designed to (1) reduce vaccine hesitancy in mothers of infants seen by trained physicians and (2) increase physician confidence in communicating about vaccines.We conducted a community-based, clinic-level, 2-arm cluster randomized trial in Washington State. Intervention clinics received physician-targeted communications training. We enrolled mothers of healthy newborns from these clinics at the hospital of birth. Mothers and physicians were surveyed at baseline and 6 months. The primary outcome was maternal vaccine hesitancy measured by Parental Attitudes on Childhood Vaccines score; secondary outcome was physician self-efficacy in communicating with parents by using 3 vaccine communication domains.We enrolled 56 clinics and 347 mothers. We conducted intervention trainings at 30 clinics, reaching 67% of eligible physicians; 26 clinics were randomized to the control group. Maternal vaccine hesitancy at baseline and follow-up changed from 9.8% to 7.5% in the intervention group and 12.6% to 8.0% in the control group. At baseline, groups were similar on all variables except maternal race and ethnicity. The intervention had no detectable effect on maternal vaccine hesitancy (adjusted odds ratio 1.22, 95% confidence interval 0.47-2.68). At follow-up, physician self-efficacy in communicating with parents was not significantly different between intervention and control groups.This physician-targeted communication intervention did not reduce maternal vaccine hesitancy or improve physician self-efficacy. Research is needed to identify physician communication strategies effective at reducing parental vaccine hesitancy in the primary care setting.Increasing immunization rates among inner-city, African American children. A randomized trial of case management.Immunization rates in the inner city remain lower than in the general US population, but efforts to raise immunization levels in inner-city areas have been largely untested.To assess the effectiveness of case management in raising immunization levels among infants of inner-city, African American families.Randomized controlled trial with follow-up through 1 year of life.Low-income areas of inner-city Los Angeles, Calif.A representative sample of 419 African American infants and their families.In-depth assessment by case managers before infants were 6 weeks of age, with home visits 2 weeks prior to when immunizations were scheduled and additional follow-up visits as needed.Percentage of children with up-to-date immunizations at age 1 year, characteristics associated with improved immunization rates, and cost-effectiveness of case management intervention.A total of 365 newborns were followed up to age 1 year. Overall, the immunization completion for the case management group was 13.2 percentage points higher than the control group (63.8% vs 50.6%; P=.01). In a logistic model, the case management effect was limited to the 25% of the sample who reported 3 or fewer well-child visits (odds ratio, 3.43; 95% confidence interval, 1.26-9.35); for them, immunization levels increased by 28 percentage points. Although for the case management group intervention was not cost-effective ($12022 per additional child immunized), it was better ($4546) for the 25% of the sample identified retrospectively to have inadequate utilization of preventive health visits.A case management intervention in the first year of life was effective but not cost-effective at raising immunization levels in inner-city, African American infants. The intervention was demonstrated to be particularly effective for subpopulations that do not access well-child care; however, currently there are no means to identify these groups prospectively. For case management to be a useful tool to raise immunizations levels among high-risk populations, better methods of tracking and targeting, such as immunization registries, need to be developed.Effective messages in vaccine promotion: a randomized trial.To test the effectiveness of messages designed to reduce vaccine misperceptions and increase vaccination rates for measles-mumps-rubella (MMR).A Web-based nationally representative 2-wave survey experiment was conducted with 1759 parents age 18 years and older residing in the United States who have children in their household age 17 years or younger (conducted June-July 2011). Parents were randomly assigned to receive 1 of 4 interventions: (1) information explaining the lack of evidence that MMR causes autism from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (2) textual information about the dangers of the diseases prevented by MMR from the Vaccine Information Statement; (3) images of children who have diseases prevented by the MMR vaccine; (4) a dramatic narrative about an infant who almost died of measles from a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention fact sheet; or to a control group.None of the interventions increased parental intent to vaccinate a future child. Refuting claims of an MMR/autism link successfully reduced misperceptions that vaccines cause autism but nonetheless decreased intent to vaccinate among parents who had the least favorable vaccine attitudes. In addition, images of sick children increased expressed belief in a vaccine/autism link and a dramatic narrative about an infant in danger increased self-reported belief in serious vaccine side effects.Current public health communications about vaccines may not be effective. For some parents, they may actually increase misperceptions or reduce vaccination intention. Attempts to increase concerns about communicable diseases or correct false claims about vaccines may be especially likely to be counterproductive. More study of pro-vaccine messaging is needed.