The clinical performance of a glass polyalkenoate (glass ionomer) cement used in a 'sandwich' technique with a composite resin to restore Class II cavities.The use of glass polyalkenoate (GPA) cement in conjunction with composite resin using an acid etch technique is now well known and a 'sandwich' of tooth/GPA cement/composite resin has been recommended to form the cervical seal at the base of approximal boxes in Class II cavities. This paper reports on the 2-year results of a controlled clinical trial using a commercial GPA lining cement. The trial was designed to evaluate the efficacy of this 'sandwich' technique. Sixty-four restorations in the mouths of 22 patients were evaluated during the 2.5 year period of the trial. The composite resin component of the restorations performed well. Five restorations failed, all in the region of the approximal box. Four failures were related to the exposed GPA cement component of the 'sandwich'. Failure was probably related to placement difficulties of the technique. The use of GPA cement laminated with composite resin when the GPA cement was enclosed within the final restoration appeared to be a successful technique.Endodontic complications after plastic restorations in general practice.To test the hypothesis that dentine and pulp protection by conditioning-and-sealing is no less effective than using a conventional calcium hydroxide lining.A cohort of healthy adults requiring a new or replacement restoration in a posterior tooth was recruited in six general practices. All procedures received local Ethics Committee approval. Exclusion criteria included signs and symptoms of pulp necrosis or inflammation, and patients unable to commit to a long-term trial. Cavity preparations were randomized to receive a calcium hydroxide lining or conditioning-and-sealing with a smear-removing bonding system. Choice of bulk restorative material (composite resin or amalgam) was at the discretion of the dentist. The key outcome measure was evidence of pulpal breakdown identified at unscheduled (emergency) or scheduled recall examinations. Postoperative sensitivity was recorded on 100 mm VAS at 24 h, 4 days and 7 days. Pulp status was assessed at 6, 12, 24 and 36 month recall, and at any emergency recall appointment. The relationship between pre-treatment and treatment variables and pulp breakdown was assessed by logistic regression (P = 0.05).A total of 602 teeth were recruited, with comparable numbers of cavities lined (288, 47.8%) or conditioned and sealed (314, 52.2%). The majority (492, 81.7%) were replacement restorations, and amalgam was the most common bulk restorative material (377, 62.6%). A total of 390 (64.8%) restored teeth were reviewed at 6 months, 307 (51%) at 12 months, 363 (60.3%) at 24 months, and 279 (46.3%) at 36 months post-restoration. Sixteen cases of pulp breakdown were identified within 36 months of restoration placement, 11 presenting as emergencies and five detected at routine recall examination. Logistic regression showed that preoperative pain, cavity treatment by lining or conditioning-and-sealing and the use of rubber dam isolation had no association with pulp breakdown. Pulp breakdown was associated with deep or pulpally exposed cavities (P < 0.001, odds ratio 7.8) and with composite rather than amalgam restorations (P = 0.001, odds ratio 2.13). Re-coding to identify teeth with pulp exposures revealed that pulpal exposure was the key determinant of adverse pulp outcomes (P < 0.0001, odds ratio 28.4) and that composite resin restorations were again more likely to be associated with pulp breakdown than amalgam (P = 0.017, odds ratio 3.92).Considered within the context of routine primary dental care: Dentists can be confident that pulps will be equally well protected from post-restorative breakdown up to 36 months by calcium hydroxide lining and conditioning-and-sealing with adhesive resins. Residual dentine thickness appears to be a key determinant of pulp responses after restorative dental treatment. In deep and pulpally exposed cavities in posterior teeth, composites were associated with more pulpal breakdown than amalgams.Evaluation of packable and conventional hybrid resin composites in Class I restorations: three-year results of a randomized, double-blind and controlled clinical trial.The clinical performance of packable and conventional hybrid resin composites in Class I restorations for a period of three years was compared using a randomized controlled double-blind clinical trial with self-matching design. A total of 50 pairs of Class I restorations were placed in 32 adult patients by one dentist in a self-matching prospective clinical trial. The paired teeth were divided into the TPH Spectrum/XenoIII (TS) restoration group and the Synergy Compact/One Coat (SC) restoration group according to a random number table. Application of the materials followed the manufacturer's instructions. The restorations were evaluated by two independent evaluators using US Public Health Service (USPHS)-Ryge modified criteria. Statistical analysis was performed using the McNemar's test with Yates' continuity correction. After three years, 40 pairs of restorations were available for evaluation. Four TS and two SC restorations failed due to fracture. Only one TS-restored tooth showed postoperative sensitivity at baseline and the symptom disappeared one week later. Alpha ratings of TS vs SC restorations were as follows: 95% vs 98% for color match, 85% vs 88% for marginal integrity, 88% vs 90% for anatomical form, 85% vs 83% for marginal discoloration, 88% vs 93% for occlusal contact. For both materials, Alpha ratings were 88% for surface texture. The three-year clinical performances of the two restorative materials were satisfactory and not significantly different for each of the parameters evaluated.Two-year clinical study on postoperative pulpal complications arising from the absence of a glass-ionomer lining in deep occlusal resin-composite restorations.To observe the effects of glass-ionomer cement (GIC) lining on the risk of pulpal complications in deep occlusal cavities with resin-based restorations.Fifty-three patients, aged 18-30 years, who had one or two deep occlusal carious lesions (≥3 mm in depth) in molars, were recruited. Dental caries were removed, and the prepared cavity was restored with resin composite using one of two restorative procedures: (a) without GIC lining; and (b) with (resin-modified) GIC lining. Restored teeth were evaluated for any pulpal complications (subjective symptoms, objective signs or loss of tooth vitality) at 1 month (baseline), 1 year, and 2 years after restoration.After excluding shallow cavities, 31 restorations without GIC lining, and 31 restorations with GIC lining, were placed and recalled at baseline without any pulpal complications. At the 1- and 2-year recalls, six patients who had restorations in group 1, and 13 in group 2, had dropped out. None of the remaining teeth in the two groups exhibited pulpal complications at either recall period, regardless of GIC lining placement.The absence of GIC lining does not increase the risk of pulpal complications in deep occlusal cavities restored with resin-based restorations in either the short or long term.Modified Class II open sandwich restorations: evaluation of interfacial adaptation and influence of different restorative techniques.The sandwich technique with resin-modified glass ionomer cement (RMGIC) has been proposed to relieve the contraction stresses of direct resin composite (RC) restorations. The aim of this study was to evaluate the interfacial adaptation to enamel and dentin of modified Class II open RMGIC/RC sandwich restorations and the influence of different light curing techniques and matrix bands. Forty box-shaped Class II fillings were placed in vivo in premolars scheduled for extraction after one month. In groups I and II, a metal matrix was used; RC was inserted with horizontal (group I) and diagonal (group II) increments and cured with indirect/direct light. Group III was performed as group II, but a transparent matrix was used. Group IV was as group II, but with a separating liner between RMGIC and RC. Group V was a closed sandwich restoration. Interfacial quality was studied using SEM replica technique. Gap-free interfacial adaptation to enamel was observed for RMGIC in 70%, for RC in 70% and to dentin for RMGIC in 81%, for RC in 56%. No significant differences were seen between the experimental groups. At the cervical margins, RMGIC showed significantly better adaptation to enamel than RC, 74% and 42%, respectively. In conclusion, the investigated restorations showed a high percentage of gap-free interfacial adaptation in vivo. Interfacial adaptation to dentin and to cervical enamel was significantly better for RMGIC than for RC.Effect of glass-ionomer cement lining on postoperative sensitivity in occlusal cavities restored with resin composite--a randomized clinical trial.This study investigated the ability of a glass-ionomer cement (GIC) lining to reduce postoperative sensitivity in occlusal cavities restored with resin composite. In addition, the effects of a total-etch and self-etch adhesive on postoperative sensitivity were also compared. Patients who had moderate to deep occlusal caries of at least one molar were recruited. Overall, 103 restorations were placed in 70 participants, with an average age of 22.8 +/- 3.8 years. Preoperatively, each tooth was evaluated for cold-stimulated tooth sensitivity using a visual analog scale. If present, tooth sensitivity induced by cold/hot drinks or occlusal function was also noted. Caries was stained with a caries detector dye, then removed using slow-speed burs and hand excavators. The cavity was restored with one of four randomly allocated restorative procedures: 1) bonded with a two-step, total-etch adhesive (Single Bond 2); 2) lined with a resin-modified GIC liner (Fuji Lining LC), then bonded with total-etch adhesive; 3) bonded with a two-step, self-etch adhesive (Clearfil SE Bond) and 4) lined with the GIC liner, then bonded with self-etch adhesive. The cavities were incrementally filled with a nanofilled hybrid resin composite. At recall, postoperative sensitivity was evaluated at one week and one month. Overall, postoperative sensitivity in daily function was rare. No significant difference in postoperative sensitivity, either in daily function or in response to a cold stimulus, was observed between the restorative procedures with or without the GIC liner, regardless of the adhesive used (p > 0.05). In addition, no difference in postoperative sensitivity was noted between use of the self-etch and total-etch adhesive.Composite resin restoration and postoperative sensitivity: clinical follow-up in an undergraduate program.To analyze the relationship between the cavity depth and liners with postoperative sensitivity of resin composite restorations.A clinical follow-up was conducted on 319 resin composite restorations made in the final year of an undergraduate program over a 3-year period. Along with the analyses of cavity type, cavity depth, type of pulpal protection and the materials used, the postoperative sensitivity was also examined on each restoration.Thirty-nine percent of the restorations had no protective layer (Group 1). As the depth of the prepared cavities increased, the restorations received one of the three pulpal protection methods; a calcium hydroxide base (Group 2), glass ionomer cement (Group 3), or protection with a calcium hydroxide base in combination with glass ionomer cement (Group 4). The incidence of postoperative sensitivity showed no significant difference among Groups 1, 2 and 3, but was significantly lower in Group 1 than in Group 4. The restorations made in shallow and medium depth cavities demonstrated significantly less-postoperative sensitivity than those made in deep cavities. The newer generation dentine-bonding agents showed a significantly lower incidence of postoperative sensitivity than the early generation group.Postoperative sensitivity in resin composite restorations was not related to the absence of protective layers but increased with the depth of cavities restored with the resin composite. The type of dentine-bonding agents could also be responsible for postoperative sensitivity.A prospective, double-blind, randomized clinical trial of a one-step, self-etch adhesive with and without an intermediary layer of a flowable composite: a 2-year evaluation.The aim of this prospective, double-blind, randomized long-term study was to evaluate the clinical performance of the self-etch adhesive AdheSE One in combination with the nanohybrid composite resin Tetric Evo Ceram for Class 1 and 2 restorations. The improvement of the clinical performance with the additional use of a flowable composite resin for cavity lining was tested.In accordance with a split-mouth design, 50 patients received 100 restorations in premolars and molars. One restoration of each patient was chosen at random to be restored with an intermediary layer of a flowable composite resin. Each restoration was scored according to the modified Ryge criteria at baseline and after 6, 12, and 24 months.After 24 months (recall rate 88%), the results of the Ryge evaluation for groups without (group T) and with application (group TF) of Tetric Flow were as follows: marginal adaptation, Alpha 40/40 and Bravo 3/4; marginal discoloration, Alpha 39/41 and Bravo 4/3; and filling integrity, Alpha 42/42 and Bravo 1/2. All restored teeth remained vital. The parameters hypersensitivity, recurrent caries, surface, color match, and proximal contact were scored Alpha for all teeth. Between groups, no statistically significant differences could be detected (Mann-Whitney U test, P > .05).In consideration of the short observation period, the clinical use of AdheSE One in stress-bearing posterior cavities reached acceptable clinical results with a 1.1% cumulative failure rate after 2 years. The use of a flowable composite resin did not show an improved clinical performance.Three-year clinical performance of a compomer in stress-bearing restorations in permanent posterior teeth.To evaluate the 3-year clinical performance of the compomer Hytac in Class I and II cavities of permanent posterior teeth.53 restorations were placed in 14 patients. The compomer Hytac was used with the self-etching adhesive Hytac OSB (total bonding) without additional enamel-etching with phosphoric acid according to manufacturer's instructions. Restorations were rated at baseline and 3 years according to modified USPHS criteria in relation to tooth type (molar, premolar), size and class of cavities, isolation type (rubber dam, cotton rolls) and use of a calcium hydroxide liner. After 3 years, 39 restorations (73.6%) were available for examination. Statistical analysis was performed using Mann-Whitney U test and Fisher's exact test.After 3 years, three restorations failed (7.7%). The success rate was therefore 92.3% with an average annual failure rate of 2.6%. There was no statistically significant difference (P < 0.05) found concerning neither of the USPHS criteria nor the failures between any of the restoration groups.Influence of cavity lining and remaining dentin thickness on the occurrence of postoperative hypersensitivity of composite restorations.To investigate the influence of the remaining dentin thickness after cavity preparation, calcium hydroxide lining, and two restorative systems on the occurrence of postoperative pain or hypersensitivity.One hundred twenty-three fillings were placed in 123 healthy patients. The remaining dentin thickness after caries excavation was measured with the Prepometer device at the deepest area of the cavity. The cavities were allocated to three different groups (shallow, medium, and deep) on the basis of the Prepometer results. The decision to use a calcium hydroxide liner or not was made by tossing a coin. Cavities which were to be later treated with an indirect restoration were restored with a buildup material. The other cavities were treated with a hybrid composite. After 6 months, the patients were re-examined and interviewed concerning postoperative pain incidents or hypersensitivity. A logistic regression was performed for the statistical analysis.Logistic regression showed no statistically significant influence of any of the three different variables "cavity depth", "calcium hydroxide liner" and "restorative material" on the occurrence of pain or hypersensitivity.The occurrence of pain or hypersensitivity does not depend on the remaining dentin thickness, calcium hydroxide lining, or the restorative system used in the present study.Effectiveness of a resin-modified glass ionomer liner in reducing hypersensitivity in posterior restorations: a study from the practitioners engaged in applied research and learning network.The objectives of this randomized comparative effectiveness study conducted by members of the Practitioners Engaged in Applied Research and Learning (PEARL) Network were to determine whether using a resin-modified glass ionomer (RMGI) liner reduces postoperative hypersensitivity (POH) in dentin-bonded Class I and Class II resin-based composite (RBC) restorations, as well as to identify other factors (putative risk factors) associated with increased POH.PEARL Network practitioner-investigators (P-Is) (n = 28) were trained to assess sensitivity determination, enamel and dentin caries activity rankings, evaluation for sleep bruxism, and materials and techniques used. The P-Is enrolled 341 participants who had hypersensitive posterior lesions. Participants were randomly assigned to receive an RBC restoration with or without an RMGI liner before P-Is applied a one-step, self-etching bonding agent. P-Is conducted sensitivity evaluations at baseline, at one and four weeks after treatment, and at all visits according to patient-reported outcomes.P-Is collected complete data regarding 347 restorations (339 participants) at baseline, with 341 (98 percent) (333 participants) recalled at four weeks. Treatment groups were balanced across baseline characteristics and measures. RBC restorations with or without an RMGI liner had the same one-week and four-week POH outcomes, as measured clinically (by means of cold or air stimulation) and according to patient-reported outcomes.Use of an RMGI liner did not reduce clinically measured or patient-reported POH in moderate-depth Class I and Class II restorations. Cold and air clinical stimulation findings were similar between groups. Practical Implications. The time, effort and expense involved in placing an RMGI liner in these moderate-depth RBC restorations may be unnecessary, as the representative liner used did not improve hypersensitivity outcomes.Effect of bonding systems on post-operative sensitivity from posterior composites.To compare post-operative sensitivity from posterior composites lined with bonding systems that utilize either a self-etching primer or phosphoric acid conditioner.Occlusal cavities on homologous contralateral posterior teeth in 28 selected subjects were lined with either One-Step Plus (a bonding system that utilizes phosphoric acid conditioner) or Clearfil SE Bond with a self-etching primer, and then restored with a hybrid resin composite. Post-operative sensitivity was assessed subjectively by asking the patient to classify pain from the restored tooth into none, mild or severe; and objectively by measuring the time it took for the patient to feel cold sensation when standardized ice stick was placed against the mid-buccal surface of the tooth.Subjective assessment showed that post-operative sensitivity was mild with either of the bonding systems; and marginal homogeneity test showed no statistically significant difference in the prevalence of post-operative sensitivity (P> 0.05), although there was a trend towards decreasing sensitivity with Clearfil SE Bond as post-operative period increased (P= 0.027). In the objective assessment, repeated measures of ANOVA showed that cold response measurements increased significantly with postoperative period only in the teeth lined with Clearfil SE Bond (P< 0.05), indicating decreasing post-operative sensitivity. However, paired t-test showed no significant difference between the cold response measurements obtained for the two bonding systems (P> 0.05).Posterior composite and glass ionomer/composite laminate restorations: 2-year clinical results.The purpose of this investigation was to evaluate and compare the clinical performance of two posterior composite materials, and two placement techniques, unlaminated and laminated to glass ionomer base. Forty Class II carious lesions were randomly assigned for restoration with one of two composites: Status or Ful-Fil; and using one of two techniques: with and without a glass ionomer base. In the 20 restorations using the laminate technique, the glass ionomer base covered the dentin and extended to the cavosurface in the gingival third of the proximal box. The restorations were evaluated clinically at 24 hours, 6 months, 12 months and 24 months. The clinical parameters used for the examination were: anatomic form, marginal adaptation, color, secondary caries, marginal discoloration and contact. Bitewing radiographs were taken at 24 hours and at 24 months to evaluate gingival margin discrepancy. Impressions of the restorations were made for fabrication of stone dies. Of the 40 restorations, 38 (95%) were available for evaluation at 24 months. For both materials there was a deterioration in anatomic form, in marginal adaptation, and in marginal discoloration. Anatomic form was significantly worse with Status (P less than 0.05). Of the 20 restorations placed using the laminate technique, two had observable loss of the glass ionomer material. Radiographic radiolucencies were observed for both materials and with both techniques. For the laminate technique, all radiolucencies were between the glass ionomer and the composite. The radiographic observations did not change after the initial evaluation. All the restorations were functioning well at 24 months, but longer observation will be required to determine whether there is a clinically significant difference between the two placement techniques.Two-year clinical performance of a packable posterior composite with and without a flowable composite liner.The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical performance of a packable fine hybrid dental composite (Prodigy Condensable) and the influence of the additional application of a flowable resin composite (Revolution, SDS Kerr) layer on marginal integrity after 2 years in stress-bearing posterior cavities according to the Ryge criteria. In 50 patients (40.5+/-17.5 years of age), 116 class II fillings (metal matrix system, glass ionomer-cement-base in 36%, rubberdam isolation in 70%) were placed, with at least two restorations per patient. The adhesive Optibond Solo Plus was used for all the restorations. In one of the two fillings in each patient, an additional layer of the flowable composite Revolution was applied in the entire cavity and separately light-cured. Baseline scores have been rated Alfa in > or =95% and Bravo in <5%. After 2 years, the results [%] of the Ryge evaluation for the two groups with/without the additional use of Revolution were: (1) Marginal Adaptation: Alfa:78/70, Bravo:16/27, Charlie:0/0, Delta:6/4; (2) Anatomic Form: Alfa:89/95, Bravo:6/2, Charlie:6/4; (3) Secondary Caries: Alfa:98/100, Bravo:2/0; (4) Marginal Discoloration: Alfa:76/68, Bravo:24/32, Charlie:0/0; (5) Surface: Alfa:90/91, Bravo:4/5, Charlie:0/0, Delta:6/4; (6) Color Match: Oscar:56/57, Alfa:44/39, Bravo:0/4, Charlie:0/0. Within the observation period (recall rate: 95%), three restorations out of 116 at baseline fractured, one restoration showed a secondary caries, one tooth received endodontic treatment, and all other restored teeth remained vital. After 2 years, no statistically significant difference (Chi-square test) in the overall survival rate between the group with the additional use of Revolution (92.8%) and that without Revolution (94.6%) was found. The combined survival rate for both groups together was 93.7% of clinically acceptable restorations.Performance of 2 packable composites at 12 months.The purpose of this randomized, double-blind, clinical trial was to compare the marginal seal of 2 packable resin composite materials in moderate to large lesions on molars.Fifty participants in need of a moderate to large Class 2 or complex Class 1 molar restoration were randomly distributed into 4 groups, to receive either Alert (Jeneric/Pentron) or SureFil (Dentsply/Caulk) resin composite with or without a surface sealer. Each participant received one restoration. With the exception that study protocol limited increments to no more than 4 mm, teeth were restored according to the manufacturers' instructions, and surface sealer was applied after finishing in the designated groups. Use of Alert includes routine placement of a flowable composite liner. Clinical performance of the restorations was evaluated in 8 categories at baseline, 6 months, and 12 months. The 2 materials were compared to determine if a difference in marginal seal existed between groups. The number of restorations exhibiting marginal staining was compared using Fischer's exact test at a significance level of 5%.Six participants did not present for the 12-month recall. At 12 months, 19 (90.5%) Alert restorations and 15 (68.2%) SureFil restorations did not exhibit marginal staining. There was no statistically significant difference between the 2 restorative materials for marginal staining. Overall, 3 restorations were rated as failures.At 12 months, materials placed with a flowable liner were not associated with a significant reduction in marginal staining.A 3-year clinical evaluation of two composite resins in class-II cavities.The purpose of this investigation was to study the clinical performance of a new system with a proposed expanding liner for composite restorations introduced in the late 1980s. The present study reports on baseline data and the result after 3 years. One hundred and four class-II cavities in 95 patients were alternatively restored by Superlux Molar and the reference material P-50 APC by 12 general practitioners in 3 public dental health clinics. After 3 years 82 restorations (79%) were available for examination. The restorations were evaluated on the basis of USPHS criteria after 1 week and again after 3 years. Stone casts were used to quantitatively categorize wear in accordance with the Leinfelder method. Color slides and bitewings were taken to supplement the clinical evaluation of color match and marginal adaptation, respectively, and secondary caries. The failure rate (USPHS rating, Charlie) was four restorations of Superlux Molar and seven of P-50 APC. The average wear after 3 years of Superlux Molar was 131 microm and of P-50 APC, 128 microm. There were no statistically significant differences between the two materials with regard to, for example, handling characteristics, anatomic form, color match, marginal discoloration, or failures. A significantly higher wear rate was found after 3 years in patients with a high level of salivary lactobacilli (> 10(5) colony-forming units (CFU)/mL at base line) compared with those with lower levels. This suggests that an acidic environment might enhance the wear rate.Clinical performance of resin composite restorations after 2 years.The objective of this study was to evaluate the clinical performance of a packable restorative material, after 2 years in stress-bearing posterior cavities, according to the Ryge criteria. At least two Class 2 restorations (occluso-mesial, mesial-occlusal-distal, occlusal-distal) were placed in 46 patients (36.7 +/- 16 years). In each of the restorations (lot 221, metal matrix band system, glass ionomer-cement-base in 53% of the cavities, mostly no rubber dam) an adhesive system was used. Additionally, in each patient a flowable composite was used in one of the two fillings. After 2 years, 70% of the patients were available for reevaluation. Two restorations needed to be replaced as a result of postoperative sensitivities within the observation period, and one tooth received root canal treatment. All other restored teeth remained vital. One restoration with marginal discoloration received a score of Charlie; another with secondary caries received a score of Bravo. All the others revealed excellent and clinically acceptable results. No statistically significant difference (Chi-square-test) was observed between the two groups, with and without an additional flowable composite. After 2 years, the restorative material performed clinically well, with no observable fractures in the restoration.Clinical evaluation of postoperative sensitivity in composite resin restorations using various liners.Light-cured resin composites are a viable option for restoring Class I and Class II cavities; however, several researchers have reported postoperative sensitivity in such restorations. In this in vivo study, 80 teeth with Class I and Class II cavities were selected. They were divided into four groups of 20 teeth each, to be restored with composite resin using different treatment protocols. Postoperative sensitivity to cold water at various temperatures was assessed for up to three months. The data was interpreted using Chi Square Test for homogeneity among the groups, and Z values of significance for pair-wise evaluation were determined. It was found that use of self-etching primers as bonding agents underneath the composite resin restorations were associated with significantly decreased incidence of postoperative sensitivity to cold stimuli.Two-year clinical evaluation of ormocer and nanofill composite with and without a flowable liner.The aim of this clinical follow-up study was to determine the clinical performance of ormocer and a new nanofill composite material, lined or not lined with flowable composites, after 2 years.Occlusal restorations (n = 108) were placed in 54 patients with two symmetric restorations per patient. In one of the two restorations in each patient, cavities were first lined with the flowable composite material Admira Flow or Filtek Flow after applying the two-step total-etch one-bottle adhesive (Admira Bond) or single bond adhesive (Single Bond). Admira or Filtek Supreme was then applied. Restorations were examined using the USPHS modified Ryge criteria for retention, color matching, cavosurface marginal discoloration, anatomic form, marginal adaptation, surface texture, and secondary caries by two previously calibrated dentists. The overall performance of the restorations was evaluated by Wilcoxon signed ranks test. The chi-square test was used to determine differences in the performance of the restorations in which the flowable composite was applied first.There was no secondary caries or postoperative sensitivity in any of the restorations at the 6-month, 1-year, and 2-year follow-up examinations. After 2 years, only one Admira restoration had failed; all other restorations were available for evaluation. There were no statistically significant differences among the materials regardless of the prior use of flowable material (p > 0.05). There was no statistically significant difference between the restorations with and without the prior application of flowable materials (p > 0.05).The clinical performance of occlusal restorations using ormocer or nanofill composite did not benefit from the additional use of the flowable composite. Both of the restorative materials exhibited ideal clinical performance.Posterior resin composite restorations with or without resin-modified, glass-ionomer cement lining: a 1-year randomized, clinical trial. To investigate the effect of resin-modified, glass-ionomer cement lining on the quality of posterior resin composite restorations, bonded with a two-step, total-etch or self-etching adhesive, at 1 year. Patients with 1-4 moderate-to-deep, primary occlusal caries in molars were informed and recruited. A total of 110 composite restorations were placed in 75 participants, with one of four restorative procedures: (a) bonded with a total-etch adhesive (Single Bond 2); (b) lined with glass-ionomer cement (Fuji Lining LC), and then bonded with total-etch adhesive; (c) bonded with a self-etching adhesive (Clearfil SE Bond); and (d) lined with glass-ionomer cement, and then bonded with self-etching adhesive. At 1 year, 57 patients (86 restorations) attended the recall. Each of the restorations was evaluated and scored from 1 (clinically excellent) to 5 (clinically poor) using the following criteria: (a) patient satisfaction; (b) fracture and retention; (c) marginal adaptation; (d) recurrent caries; and (e) post-operative sensitivity. At 1 year, the qualities of the restorations were not significantly affected by the placement of glass-ionomer cement lining, regardless of the adhesive used (P > 0.05). Most of the restorations were scored 1 for all criteria. The benefit of placing a glass-ionomer cement liner in resin composite restoration is questionable.Clinical evaluation of two packable posterior composites: a five-year follow-up.Research has suggested that packable resin-based composites inserted with a placement technique similar to amalgam condensation can reduce the sensitivity associated with posterior restorations. The authors evaluated the clinical performance, including associated sensitivity, of two packable composites in a randomized five-year clinical trial.A single operator randomly placed two restorations in each of 33 patients: one restoration consisting of Alert (Jeneric/Pentron, Wallingford, Conn.) and the other consisting of SureFil (Dentsply/Caulk, Milford, Del.). There were 30 Class I and 36 Class II restorations. Two independent evaluators evaluated the restorations by using modified U.S. Public Health Service criteria. The authors analyzed data by means of the Fisher, chi(2) and McNemar tests at P < .05.Of 60 restorations evaluated at five years, two Class II restorations (one SureFil, one Alert) failed. All other restorations received the highest score possible for sensitivity and vitality. The only difference between the composites at the five-year recall was the significantly better surface texture of SureFil. The authors observed significantly different scores between the baseline and at five years for marginal discoloration (Alert and SureFil), surface texture (Alert and SureFil) and color (SureFil).Both packable resin-based composites showed excellent durability during the five-year follow-up.The investigated resin-based composites are suitable for posterior restorations.