Cross validation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in community dwelling older adults residing in the Southeastern US.Cross validation study of the MoCA for the detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) in a community-based cohort residing in the Southeastern United States.One hundred and eighteen English-speaking older adults, who underwent diagnostic evaluation as part of an on-going prospective study, were administered the MoCA and MMSE. Twenty were diagnosed with AD, 24 met criteria for amnestic MCI and 74 were considered cognitively normal. Sensitivities and specificities were calculated using the recommended cut-off scores and ROC curve analyses were performed to determine optimal sensitivity and specificity. The influence of age, education and gender on MoCA score was also examined.Using a cut-off score of 24 or below, the MMSE was insensitive to cognitive impairment. Using the recommended cut-off score of 26, the MoCA detected 97% of those with cognitive impairment but specificity was fair (35%). Using a lower cut-off score of 23, the MoCA exhibited excellent sensitivity (96%) and specificity (95%).The MoCA appears to have utility as a cognitive screen for early detection of AD and for MCI and warrants further investigation regarding its applicability in primary care settings, varying ethnic groups, and younger at-risk individuals.Application study of quick cognitive screening test in identifying mild cognitive impairment.To assess whether quick cognitive screening test (QCST) could quickly identify mild cognitive impairment (MCI).QCST and a full set of standardized neuropsychological tests, including mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) were performed. A total number of 121 cases of MCI [41 cases of amnestic MCI-single domain (aMCI-s); 44 of amnestic MCI-multiple domain (aMCI-m); 36 of nonamnestic MCI (naMCI)], 79 cases of mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 186 healthy elderly volunteers were employed in the present study. All the participants (55-85 years old) had an educational level no less than 5 years. QCST subtests included word list recall, naming test, animal fluency test, similarity test, color trail-1min, clock drawing test, finger construction test, and digit span test. The total score of QCST was 90 points, 10 points for each index of subtests.The total scores of QCST in MCI, AD and the control groups were (58.13+/-8.18), (44.53+/-10.54) and (72.92+/-6.85) points, respectively. According to the educational level, the cut off scores of participants with an educational level of 5-8 years, 9-12 years and more than 13 years were 63, 65 and 68 points, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of QCST in detection of MCI were 87.6% (85.7% for aMCI-s, 90.1% for aMCI-m and 89.5% for naMCI) and 84.3%, respectively. The area under the curve was 0.923 (95% CI: 0.892-0.953). Delayed memory, color trail-1min and similarity test could help distinguish between aMCI and naMCI.QCST may have a good sensitivity and specificity for MCI detection, which warrants its further clinical application.[Applicability and validity of the Dutch version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (moCA-d) in diagnosing MCI].The MoCA is a new screening test to detect Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). Purpose of this study is validating the Dutch version (MoCA-D).We administered the MoCA-D to healthy control subjects and to elderly with MCI or dementia from a memory disorder outpatient clinic and a geriatric (outpatient) clinic (n = 30, 32, 37 respectively, age > or = 60). Neuropsychological testing was part of the standard procedure for patients to diagnose MCI. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive values (positive: PPV and negative: NPV) of the MoCA-D were assessed.A significant effect of group was found on MoCA-D total score (F (2.95) =67.9; p < 0.01). With a cutoff score of < or = 25, sensitivity and specificity to detect MCI in relation to healthy controls were 72% and 73%, respectively. PPV and NPV were 84% and 56%, respectively. With a cut-off score of < or = 20, sensitivity to detect dementia in relation to MCI was 100% for severe dementia and 75% for mild dementia. Specificity for dementia was 81%, PPV 94% and NPV 55%.The MoCA-D distinguishes between healthy elderly, MCI patients and dementia patients. However, in this study, insufficient sensitivity and poor specificity were found. For the present, applying a broader and flexible screening procedure in order to detect MCI seems a more useful method than the interpretation of one test result in particular.Validation of the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in screening for dementia.To validate the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scale in screening for dementia.The MoCA translation and cultural adaptation was carried using a combined qualitative and quantitative approach. Sample size was calculated to detect a targeted sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 85%. Sample consisted of 49 participants diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type (AD) according to DSM-IV criteria and 49 normal controls (NC) aged ≥50 years. All subjects were administered the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and MoCA Sinhala version (MoCA-S). Concurrent validity was assessed using Pearson correlation coefficients between the MoCA-S scores and MMSE scores. Criterion validity was assessed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.Mean MoCA scores between NC (26.71, SD 2.4) and AD group (16.78, SD 5.9) were significantly different (t=10.8, p<0.001). Cronbach's alpha of 0.818 indicated good internal consistency. Attention (digit span, sustained attention, and the serial 7 calculation task) had the highest discriminant ability followed by visuospatial skills (trail making, cube drawing and clock drawing). Naming had poor discriminant ability. There was a high, positive correlation between MoCA-S total scores and MMSE total scores. (r=0.907, p<0.001). The area under the ROC curve was 0.975 (95%CI 0.94-1.0) for the MoCA and 0.928 (95% CI 0.87-0.98) for MMSE. A cut-off value of 24 provided the best balance between sensitivity (98.0 7%) and specificity (79.6 %).MoCA-S is a valid and reliable instrument which can be used as a brief screening instrument for dementia in Sri Lanka.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment.To develop a 10-minute cognitive screening tool (Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA) to assist first-line physicians in detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a clinical state that often progresses to dementia.Validation study.A community clinic and an academic center.Ninety-four patients meeting MCI clinical criteria supported by psychometric measures, 93 patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score > or =17), and 90 healthy elderly controls (NC).The MoCA and MMSE were administered to all participants, and sensitivity and specificity of both measures were assessed for detection of MCI and mild AD.Using a cutoff score 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 18% to detect MCI, whereas the MoCA detected 90% of MCI subjects. In the mild AD group, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 78%, whereas the MoCA detected 100%. Specificity was excellent for both MMSE and MoCA (100% and 87%, respectively).MCI as an entity is evolving and somewhat controversial. The MoCA is a brief cognitive screening tool with high sensitivity and specificity for detecting MCI as currently conceptualized in patients performing in the normal range on the MMSE.Brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment in older Japanese: validation of the Japanese version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), developed by Dr Nasreddine (Nasreddine et al. 2005), is a brief cognitive screening tool for detecting older people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We examined the reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the MoCA (MoCA-J) in older Japanese subjects.Subjects were recruited from the outpatient memory clinic of Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital or community-based medical health check-ups in 2008. The MoCA-J, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the revised version of Hasegawa's Dementia Scale (HDS-R), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and routine neuropsychological batteries were conducted on 96 older subjects. Mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) was found in 30 subjects and MCI in 30, with 36 normal controls.The Cronbach's alpha of MoCA-J as an index of internal consistency was 0.74. The test-retest reliability of MoCA, using intraclass correlation coefficient between the scores at baseline survey and follow-up survey 8 weeks later was 0.88 (P < 0.001). MoCA-J score was highly correlated with MMSE (r = 0.83, P < 0.001), HDS-R (r = 0.79, P < 0.001) and CDR (r = -0.79, P < 0.001) scores. The areas under receiver-operator curves (AUC) for predicting MCI and AD groups by the MoCA-J were 0.95 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.90-1.00) and 0.99 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. The corresponding values for MMSE and HDS-R were 0.85 (95% CI = 0.75-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), and 0.86 (95% CI = 0.76-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. Using a cut-off point of 25/26, the MoCA-J demonstrated a sensitivity of 93.0% and a specificity of 87.0% in screening MCI.The MoCA-J could be a useful cognitive test for screening MCI, and could be recommended in a primary clinical setting and for geriatric health screening in the community.Clinical application of the Polish adaptation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test in screening for cognitive impairment.A group of 115 subjects (36 meeting DSM-IV criteria for Alzheimer disease (AD) [Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) = 1], 42 meeting Petersen's criteria for MCI [CDR = 0.5], and 37 cognitively intact controls [CDR = 0]) was recruited for the study in the university-based Alzheimer out-patient clinic. All participants underwent general medical, neurological, and psychiatric examinations. The MoCA, the MMSE, CDR and the short (15-item) version of the Geriatric Depression Scale were also applied.Both MCI and AD groups exhibited impaired performance on MoCA compared to controls. Polish versions of the MMSE and MoCA tests were comparable in discriminating mild dementia from both MCI and control groups. The Polish version of the MoCA test performed marginally better than MMSE in discriminating MCI from controls. We propose to use the MoCA test to screen for MCI using an optimal cut-off score of 24 and to screen for dementia using a cut-off score of 19.The Polish version of the MoCA seems effective in the detection of deteriorated cognitive performance and appropriate for differentiating impaired from preserved cognitive function in a Polish population.Cross validation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in community dwelling older adults residing in the Southeastern US.Cross validation study of the MoCA for the detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) in a community-based cohort residing in the Southeastern United States.One hundred and eighteen English-speaking older adults, who underwent diagnostic evaluation as part of an on-going prospective study, were administered the MoCA and MMSE. Twenty were diagnosed with AD, 24 met criteria for amnestic MCI and 74 were considered cognitively normal. Sensitivities and specificities were calculated using the recommended cut-off scores and ROC curve analyses were performed to determine optimal sensitivity and specificity. The influence of age, education and gender on MoCA score was also examined.Using a cut-off score of 24 or below, the MMSE was insensitive to cognitive impairment. Using the recommended cut-off score of 26, the MoCA detected 97% of those with cognitive impairment but specificity was fair (35%). Using a lower cut-off score of 23, the MoCA exhibited excellent sensitivity (96%) and specificity (95%).The MoCA appears to have utility as a cognitive screen for early detection of AD and for MCI and warrants further investigation regarding its applicability in primary care settings, varying ethnic groups, and younger at-risk individuals.Application study of quick cognitive screening test in identifying mild cognitive impairment.To assess whether quick cognitive screening test (QCST) could quickly identify mild cognitive impairment (MCI).QCST and a full set of standardized neuropsychological tests, including mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) were performed. A total number of 121 cases of MCI [41 cases of amnestic MCI-single domain (aMCI-s); 44 of amnestic MCI-multiple domain (aMCI-m); 36 of nonamnestic MCI (naMCI)], 79 cases of mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 186 healthy elderly volunteers were employed in the present study. All the participants (55-85 years old) had an educational level no less than 5 years. QCST subtests included word list recall, naming test, animal fluency test, similarity test, color trail-1min, clock drawing test, finger construction test, and digit span test. The total score of QCST was 90 points, 10 points for each index of subtests.The total scores of QCST in MCI, AD and the control groups were (58.13+/-8.18), (44.53+/-10.54) and (72.92+/-6.85) points, respectively. According to the educational level, the cut off scores of participants with an educational level of 5-8 years, 9-12 years and more than 13 years were 63, 65 and 68 points, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of QCST in detection of MCI were 87.6% (85.7% for aMCI-s, 90.1% for aMCI-m and 89.5% for naMCI) and 84.3%, respectively. The area under the curve was 0.923 (95% CI: 0.892-0.953). Delayed memory, color trail-1min and similarity test could help distinguish between aMCI and naMCI.QCST may have a good sensitivity and specificity for MCI detection, which warrants its further clinical application.[Applicability and validity of the Dutch version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (moCA-d) in diagnosing MCI].The MoCA is a new screening test to detect Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). Purpose of this study is validating the Dutch version (MoCA-D).We administered the MoCA-D to healthy control subjects and to elderly with MCI or dementia from a memory disorder outpatient clinic and a geriatric (outpatient) clinic (n = 30, 32, 37 respectively, age > or = 60). Neuropsychological testing was part of the standard procedure for patients to diagnose MCI. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive values (positive: PPV and negative: NPV) of the MoCA-D were assessed.A significant effect of group was found on MoCA-D total score (F (2.95) =67.9; p < 0.01). With a cutoff score of < or = 25, sensitivity and specificity to detect MCI in relation to healthy controls were 72% and 73%, respectively. PPV and NPV were 84% and 56%, respectively. With a cut-off score of < or = 20, sensitivity to detect dementia in relation to MCI was 100% for severe dementia and 75% for mild dementia. Specificity for dementia was 81%, PPV 94% and NPV 55%.The MoCA-D distinguishes between healthy elderly, MCI patients and dementia patients. However, in this study, insufficient sensitivity and poor specificity were found. For the present, applying a broader and flexible screening procedure in order to detect MCI seems a more useful method than the interpretation of one test result in particular.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment: validity and utility in a memory clinic setting.To prospectively validate the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in a UK memory clinic.We administered the MoCA and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) to 32 subjects fulfilling diagnostic criteria for dementia, to 23 subjects fulfilling diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and to 12 memory clinic comparison subjects, at baseline and then at 6-month follow-up. Clinical diagnoses for dementia and MCI were made according to ICD-10 and Petersen criteria. The sensitivity and specificity of both measures were assessed for detection of MCI and dementia.With a cut-off score of 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 17% to detect subjects with MCI, whereas the MoCA detected 83%. The MMSE had a sensitivity of 25% to detect subjects with dementia, whereas the MoCA detected 94%. Specificity for the MMSE was 100%, and specificity for the MoCA was 50%. Of subjects with MCI, 35% developed dementia within 6 months, and all scored less than 26 points on the MoCA at baseline.The MoCA is a useful brief screening tool for the detection of mild dementia or MCI in subjects scoring over 25 points on the MMSE. In patients already diagnosed with MCI, the MoCA helps identify those at risk of developing dementia at 6-month follow-up.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment.To develop a 10-minute cognitive screening tool (Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA) to assist first-line physicians in detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a clinical state that often progresses to dementia.Validation study.A community clinic and an academic center.Ninety-four patients meeting MCI clinical criteria supported by psychometric measures, 93 patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score > or =17), and 90 healthy elderly controls (NC).The MoCA and MMSE were administered to all participants, and sensitivity and specificity of both measures were assessed for detection of MCI and mild AD.Using a cutoff score 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 18% to detect MCI, whereas the MoCA detected 90% of MCI subjects. In the mild AD group, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 78%, whereas the MoCA detected 100%. Specificity was excellent for both MMSE and MoCA (100% and 87%, respectively).MCI as an entity is evolving and somewhat controversial. The MoCA is a brief cognitive screening tool with high sensitivity and specificity for detecting MCI as currently conceptualized in patients performing in the normal range on the MMSE.Montreal cognitive assessment in detecting cognitive impairment in Chinese elderly individuals: a population-based study.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) has been proved brief and sensitive to screen for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early dementia in some developed countries or areas. However, little MoCA data are available from mainland China. In this study, the MoCA was applied to 8411 Chinese community dwellers aged 65 or older (6283 = cognitively normal [CN], 1687 = MCI, and 441 = dementia). The MoCA norms were established considering significant influential factors. The optimal cutoff points were 13/14 for illiterate individuals, 19/20 for individuals with 1 to 6 years of education, and 24/25 for individuals with 7 or more years of education. With the optimal cutoffs, the sensitivity of the MoCA was 83.8% for all cognitive impairments, 80.5% for MCI and 96.9% for dementia, and the specificity for identifying CN was 82.5%. These indicate that with optimal cutoffs, the MoCA is valid to screen for cognitive impairment in elderly Chinese living in communities.Validation of the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in screening for dementia.To validate the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scale in screening for dementia.The MoCA translation and cultural adaptation was carried using a combined qualitative and quantitative approach. Sample size was calculated to detect a targeted sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 85%. Sample consisted of 49 participants diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type (AD) according to DSM-IV criteria and 49 normal controls (NC) aged ≥50 years. All subjects were administered the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and MoCA Sinhala version (MoCA-S). Concurrent validity was assessed using Pearson correlation coefficients between the MoCA-S scores and MMSE scores. Criterion validity was assessed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.Mean MoCA scores between NC (26.71, SD 2.4) and AD group (16.78, SD 5.9) were significantly different (t=10.8, p<0.001). Cronbach's alpha of 0.818 indicated good internal consistency. Attention (digit span, sustained attention, and the serial 7 calculation task) had the highest discriminant ability followed by visuospatial skills (trail making, cube drawing and clock drawing). Naming had poor discriminant ability. There was a high, positive correlation between MoCA-S total scores and MMSE total scores. (r=0.907, p<0.001). The area under the ROC curve was 0.975 (95%CI 0.94-1.0) for the MoCA and 0.928 (95% CI 0.87-0.98) for MMSE. A cut-off value of 24 provided the best balance between sensitivity (98.0 7%) and specificity (79.6 %).MoCA-S is a valid and reliable instrument which can be used as a brief screening instrument for dementia in Sri Lanka.Brief screening for mild cognitive impairment in elderly outpatient clinic: validation of the Korean version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a brief cognitive screening tool with high sensitivity for screening patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The authors examined the validity and reliability of the Korean version of the MoCA (MoCA-K) in elderly outpatients. The MoCA-K, a Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and neuropsychological batteries were administered to 196 elderly persons (mild Alzheimer's disease [AD] = 44, MCI = 37, normal controls [NC] = 115). MoCA-K scores were highly correlated with those of MMSE and CDR. Using a cutoff score of 22/23, the MoCA-K had an excellent sensitivity of 89% and a good specificity of 84% for screening MCI. Internal consistency and test-retest reliability were good. The results obtained show that the MoCA-K is brief, reliable, and suitable for use as a screening tool to screen MCI patients in elderly outpatient clinic settings.Screening utility of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA): in place of--or as well as--the MMSE?This aim of this study was to assess the clinical utility of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) as a screening instrument for cognitive impairment in patients referred to a memory clinic, alone and in combination with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).This was a pragmatic prospective study of consecutive referrals attending a memory clinic (n = 150) over an 18-month period. Patients were diagnosed using standard clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia (DSM-IV) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI; cognitive impairment prevalence = 43%) independent of MoCA test scores.MoCA proved acceptable to patients and was quick and easy to use. Using the cut-offs for MoCA and MMSE specified in the index paper (≥26/30), MoCA was more sensitive than MMSE (0.97 vs 0.65) but less specific (0.60 vs 0.89), with better diagnostic accuracy (area under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve 0.91 vs 0.83). Downward adjustment of the MoCA cut-off to ≥20/30 maximized test accuracy and improved specificity (0.95) for some loss of sensitivity (0.63). Combining MoCA with the MMSE - either in series or in parallel - did not improve diagnostic utility above that with either test alone.In a memory clinic population, MoCA proved sensitive for the diagnosis of cognitive impairment. Use of a cut-off lower than that specified in the index study may be required to improve overall test accuracy and specificity for some loss of sensitivity in populations with a high prior probability of cognitive impairment. Combining the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) with the MMSE did not improve diagnostic utility.Brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment in older Japanese: validation of the Japanese version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), developed by Dr Nasreddine (Nasreddine et al. 2005), is a brief cognitive screening tool for detecting older people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We examined the reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the MoCA (MoCA-J) in older Japanese subjects.Subjects were recruited from the outpatient memory clinic of Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital or community-based medical health check-ups in 2008. The MoCA-J, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the revised version of Hasegawa's Dementia Scale (HDS-R), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and routine neuropsychological batteries were conducted on 96 older subjects. Mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) was found in 30 subjects and MCI in 30, with 36 normal controls.The Cronbach's alpha of MoCA-J as an index of internal consistency was 0.74. The test-retest reliability of MoCA, using intraclass correlation coefficient between the scores at baseline survey and follow-up survey 8 weeks later was 0.88 (P < 0.001). MoCA-J score was highly correlated with MMSE (r = 0.83, P < 0.001), HDS-R (r = 0.79, P < 0.001) and CDR (r = -0.79, P < 0.001) scores. The areas under receiver-operator curves (AUC) for predicting MCI and AD groups by the MoCA-J were 0.95 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.90-1.00) and 0.99 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. The corresponding values for MMSE and HDS-R were 0.85 (95% CI = 0.75-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), and 0.86 (95% CI = 0.76-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. Using a cut-off point of 25/26, the MoCA-J demonstrated a sensitivity of 93.0% and a specificity of 87.0% in screening MCI.The MoCA-J could be a useful cognitive test for screening MCI, and could be recommended in a primary clinical setting and for geriatric health screening in the community.Clinical application of the Polish adaptation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test in screening for cognitive impairment.A group of 115 subjects (36 meeting DSM-IV criteria for Alzheimer disease (AD) [Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) = 1], 42 meeting Petersen's criteria for MCI [CDR = 0.5], and 37 cognitively intact controls [CDR = 0]) was recruited for the study in the university-based Alzheimer out-patient clinic. All participants underwent general medical, neurological, and psychiatric examinations. The MoCA, the MMSE, CDR and the short (15-item) version of the Geriatric Depression Scale were also applied.Both MCI and AD groups exhibited impaired performance on MoCA compared to controls. Polish versions of the MMSE and MoCA tests were comparable in discriminating mild dementia from both MCI and control groups. The Polish version of the MoCA test performed marginally better than MMSE in discriminating MCI from controls. We propose to use the MoCA test to screen for MCI using an optimal cut-off score of 24 and to screen for dementia using a cut-off score of 19.The Polish version of the MoCA seems effective in the detection of deteriorated cognitive performance and appropriate for differentiating impaired from preserved cognitive function in a Polish population.Cross validation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in community dwelling older adults residing in the Southeastern US.Cross validation study of the MoCA for the detection of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) in a community-based cohort residing in the Southeastern United States.One hundred and eighteen English-speaking older adults, who underwent diagnostic evaluation as part of an on-going prospective study, were administered the MoCA and MMSE. Twenty were diagnosed with AD, 24 met criteria for amnestic MCI and 74 were considered cognitively normal. Sensitivities and specificities were calculated using the recommended cut-off scores and ROC curve analyses were performed to determine optimal sensitivity and specificity. The influence of age, education and gender on MoCA score was also examined.Using a cut-off score of 24 or below, the MMSE was insensitive to cognitive impairment. Using the recommended cut-off score of 26, the MoCA detected 97% of those with cognitive impairment but specificity was fair (35%). Using a lower cut-off score of 23, the MoCA exhibited excellent sensitivity (96%) and specificity (95%).The MoCA appears to have utility as a cognitive screen for early detection of AD and for MCI and warrants further investigation regarding its applicability in primary care settings, varying ethnic groups, and younger at-risk individuals.Application study of quick cognitive screening test in identifying mild cognitive impairment.To assess whether quick cognitive screening test (QCST) could quickly identify mild cognitive impairment (MCI).QCST and a full set of standardized neuropsychological tests, including mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) were performed. A total number of 121 cases of MCI [41 cases of amnestic MCI-single domain (aMCI-s); 44 of amnestic MCI-multiple domain (aMCI-m); 36 of nonamnestic MCI (naMCI)], 79 cases of mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 186 healthy elderly volunteers were employed in the present study. All the participants (55-85 years old) had an educational level no less than 5 years. QCST subtests included word list recall, naming test, animal fluency test, similarity test, color trail-1min, clock drawing test, finger construction test, and digit span test. The total score of QCST was 90 points, 10 points for each index of subtests.The total scores of QCST in MCI, AD and the control groups were (58.13+/-8.18), (44.53+/-10.54) and (72.92+/-6.85) points, respectively. According to the educational level, the cut off scores of participants with an educational level of 5-8 years, 9-12 years and more than 13 years were 63, 65 and 68 points, respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of QCST in detection of MCI were 87.6% (85.7% for aMCI-s, 90.1% for aMCI-m and 89.5% for naMCI) and 84.3%, respectively. The area under the curve was 0.923 (95% CI: 0.892-0.953). Delayed memory, color trail-1min and similarity test could help distinguish between aMCI and naMCI.QCST may have a good sensitivity and specificity for MCI detection, which warrants its further clinical application.[Applicability and validity of the Dutch version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (moCA-d) in diagnosing MCI].The MoCA is a new screening test to detect Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). Purpose of this study is validating the Dutch version (MoCA-D).We administered the MoCA-D to healthy control subjects and to elderly with MCI or dementia from a memory disorder outpatient clinic and a geriatric (outpatient) clinic (n = 30, 32, 37 respectively, age > or = 60). Neuropsychological testing was part of the standard procedure for patients to diagnose MCI. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive values (positive: PPV and negative: NPV) of the MoCA-D were assessed.A significant effect of group was found on MoCA-D total score (F (2.95) =67.9; p < 0.01). With a cutoff score of < or = 25, sensitivity and specificity to detect MCI in relation to healthy controls were 72% and 73%, respectively. PPV and NPV were 84% and 56%, respectively. With a cut-off score of < or = 20, sensitivity to detect dementia in relation to MCI was 100% for severe dementia and 75% for mild dementia. Specificity for dementia was 81%, PPV 94% and NPV 55%.The MoCA-D distinguishes between healthy elderly, MCI patients and dementia patients. However, in this study, insufficient sensitivity and poor specificity were found. For the present, applying a broader and flexible screening procedure in order to detect MCI seems a more useful method than the interpretation of one test result in particular.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment: validity and utility in a memory clinic setting.To prospectively validate the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in a UK memory clinic.We administered the MoCA and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) to 32 subjects fulfilling diagnostic criteria for dementia, to 23 subjects fulfilling diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and to 12 memory clinic comparison subjects, at baseline and then at 6-month follow-up. Clinical diagnoses for dementia and MCI were made according to ICD-10 and Petersen criteria. The sensitivity and specificity of both measures were assessed for detection of MCI and dementia.With a cut-off score of 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 17% to detect subjects with MCI, whereas the MoCA detected 83%. The MMSE had a sensitivity of 25% to detect subjects with dementia, whereas the MoCA detected 94%. Specificity for the MMSE was 100%, and specificity for the MoCA was 50%. Of subjects with MCI, 35% developed dementia within 6 months, and all scored less than 26 points on the MoCA at baseline.The MoCA is a useful brief screening tool for the detection of mild dementia or MCI in subjects scoring over 25 points on the MMSE. In patients already diagnosed with MCI, the MoCA helps identify those at risk of developing dementia at 6-month follow-up.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment.To develop a 10-minute cognitive screening tool (Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA) to assist first-line physicians in detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a clinical state that often progresses to dementia.Validation study.A community clinic and an academic center.Ninety-four patients meeting MCI clinical criteria supported by psychometric measures, 93 patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) (Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score > or =17), and 90 healthy elderly controls (NC).The MoCA and MMSE were administered to all participants, and sensitivity and specificity of both measures were assessed for detection of MCI and mild AD.Using a cutoff score 26, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 18% to detect MCI, whereas the MoCA detected 90% of MCI subjects. In the mild AD group, the MMSE had a sensitivity of 78%, whereas the MoCA detected 100%. Specificity was excellent for both MMSE and MoCA (100% and 87%, respectively).MCI as an entity is evolving and somewhat controversial. The MoCA is a brief cognitive screening tool with high sensitivity and specificity for detecting MCI as currently conceptualized in patients performing in the normal range on the MMSE.Montreal cognitive assessment in detecting cognitive impairment in Chinese elderly individuals: a population-based study.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) has been proved brief and sensitive to screen for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and early dementia in some developed countries or areas. However, little MoCA data are available from mainland China. In this study, the MoCA was applied to 8411 Chinese community dwellers aged 65 or older (6283 = cognitively normal [CN], 1687 = MCI, and 441 = dementia). The MoCA norms were established considering significant influential factors. The optimal cutoff points were 13/14 for illiterate individuals, 19/20 for individuals with 1 to 6 years of education, and 24/25 for individuals with 7 or more years of education. With the optimal cutoffs, the sensitivity of the MoCA was 83.8% for all cognitive impairments, 80.5% for MCI and 96.9% for dementia, and the specificity for identifying CN was 82.5%. These indicate that with optimal cutoffs, the MoCA is valid to screen for cognitive impairment in elderly Chinese living in communities.Validation of the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in screening for dementia.To validate the Sinhala version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scale in screening for dementia.The MoCA translation and cultural adaptation was carried using a combined qualitative and quantitative approach. Sample size was calculated to detect a targeted sensitivity of 85% and a specificity of 85%. Sample consisted of 49 participants diagnosed with dementia of the Alzheimer's type (AD) according to DSM-IV criteria and 49 normal controls (NC) aged ≥50 years. All subjects were administered the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and MoCA Sinhala version (MoCA-S). Concurrent validity was assessed using Pearson correlation coefficients between the MoCA-S scores and MMSE scores. Criterion validity was assessed using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis.Mean MoCA scores between NC (26.71, SD 2.4) and AD group (16.78, SD 5.9) were significantly different (t=10.8, p<0.001). Cronbach's alpha of 0.818 indicated good internal consistency. Attention (digit span, sustained attention, and the serial 7 calculation task) had the highest discriminant ability followed by visuospatial skills (trail making, cube drawing and clock drawing). Naming had poor discriminant ability. There was a high, positive correlation between MoCA-S total scores and MMSE total scores. (r=0.907, p<0.001). The area under the ROC curve was 0.975 (95%CI 0.94-1.0) for the MoCA and 0.928 (95% CI 0.87-0.98) for MMSE. A cut-off value of 24 provided the best balance between sensitivity (98.0 7%) and specificity (79.6 %).MoCA-S is a valid and reliable instrument which can be used as a brief screening instrument for dementia in Sri Lanka.Brief screening for mild cognitive impairment in elderly outpatient clinic: validation of the Korean version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a brief cognitive screening tool with high sensitivity for screening patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The authors examined the validity and reliability of the Korean version of the MoCA (MoCA-K) in elderly outpatients. The MoCA-K, a Korean version of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and neuropsychological batteries were administered to 196 elderly persons (mild Alzheimer's disease [AD] = 44, MCI = 37, normal controls [NC] = 115). MoCA-K scores were highly correlated with those of MMSE and CDR. Using a cutoff score of 22/23, the MoCA-K had an excellent sensitivity of 89% and a good specificity of 84% for screening MCI. Internal consistency and test-retest reliability were good. The results obtained show that the MoCA-K is brief, reliable, and suitable for use as a screening tool to screen MCI patients in elderly outpatient clinic settings.Screening utility of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA): in place of--or as well as--the MMSE?This aim of this study was to assess the clinical utility of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) as a screening instrument for cognitive impairment in patients referred to a memory clinic, alone and in combination with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).This was a pragmatic prospective study of consecutive referrals attending a memory clinic (n = 150) over an 18-month period. Patients were diagnosed using standard clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia (DSM-IV) and mild cognitive impairment (MCI; cognitive impairment prevalence = 43%) independent of MoCA test scores.MoCA proved acceptable to patients and was quick and easy to use. Using the cut-offs for MoCA and MMSE specified in the index paper (≥26/30), MoCA was more sensitive than MMSE (0.97 vs 0.65) but less specific (0.60 vs 0.89), with better diagnostic accuracy (area under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve 0.91 vs 0.83). Downward adjustment of the MoCA cut-off to ≥20/30 maximized test accuracy and improved specificity (0.95) for some loss of sensitivity (0.63). Combining MoCA with the MMSE - either in series or in parallel - did not improve diagnostic utility above that with either test alone.In a memory clinic population, MoCA proved sensitive for the diagnosis of cognitive impairment. Use of a cut-off lower than that specified in the index study may be required to improve overall test accuracy and specificity for some loss of sensitivity in populations with a high prior probability of cognitive impairment. Combining the Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline in the Elderly (IQCODE) with the MMSE did not improve diagnostic utility.Brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment in older Japanese: validation of the Japanese version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment.The Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), developed by Dr Nasreddine (Nasreddine et al. 2005), is a brief cognitive screening tool for detecting older people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). We examined the reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the MoCA (MoCA-J) in older Japanese subjects.Subjects were recruited from the outpatient memory clinic of Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital or community-based medical health check-ups in 2008. The MoCA-J, the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the revised version of Hasegawa's Dementia Scale (HDS-R), Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale, and routine neuropsychological batteries were conducted on 96 older subjects. Mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) was found in 30 subjects and MCI in 30, with 36 normal controls.The Cronbach's alpha of MoCA-J as an index of internal consistency was 0.74. The test-retest reliability of MoCA, using intraclass correlation coefficient between the scores at baseline survey and follow-up survey 8 weeks later was 0.88 (P < 0.001). MoCA-J score was highly correlated with MMSE (r = 0.83, P < 0.001), HDS-R (r = 0.79, P < 0.001) and CDR (r = -0.79, P < 0.001) scores. The areas under receiver-operator curves (AUC) for predicting MCI and AD groups by the MoCA-J were 0.95 (95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.90-1.00) and 0.99 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. The corresponding values for MMSE and HDS-R were 0.85 (95% CI = 0.75-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), and 0.86 (95% CI = 0.76-0.95) and 0.97 (95% CI = 0.00-1.00), respectively. Using a cut-off point of 25/26, the MoCA-J demonstrated a sensitivity of 93.0% and a specificity of 87.0% in screening MCI.The MoCA-J could be a useful cognitive test for screening MCI, and could be recommended in a primary clinical setting and for geriatric health screening in the community.Clinical application of the Polish adaptation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test in screening for cognitive impairment.A group of 115 subjects (36 meeting DSM-IV criteria for Alzheimer disease (AD) [Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) = 1], 42 meeting Petersen's criteria for MCI [CDR = 0.5], and 37 cognitively intact controls [CDR = 0]) was recruited for the study in the university-based Alzheimer out-patient clinic. All participants underwent general medical, neurological, and psychiatric examinations. The MoCA, the MMSE, CDR and the short (15-item) version of the Geriatric Depression Scale were also applied.Both MCI and AD groups exhibited impaired performance on MoCA compared to controls. Polish versions of the MMSE and MoCA tests were comparable in discriminating mild dementia from both MCI and control groups. The Polish version of the MoCA test performed marginally better than MMSE in discriminating MCI from controls. We propose to use the MoCA test to screen for MCI using an optimal cut-off score of 24 and to screen for dementia using a cut-off score of 19.The Polish version of the MoCA seems effective in the detection of deteriorated cognitive performance and appropriate for differentiating impaired from preserved cognitive function in a Polish population.