A modified calculation of ankle-brachial pressure index is far more sensitive in the detection of peripheral arterial disease.Ankle-brachial pressure index (ABI) is a simple, inexpensive, and useful tool in the detection of peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAD). The current guidelines published by the American Heart Association define ABI as the quotient of the higher of the systolic blood pressures (SBPs) of the two ankle arteries of that limb (either the anterior tibial artery or the posterior tibial artery) and the higher of the two brachial SBPs of the upper limbs. We hypothesized that considering the lower of the two ankle arterial SBPs of a side as the numerator and the higher of the brachial SBPs as the denominator would increase its diagnostic yield.The former method of eliciting ABI was termed as high ankle pressure (HAP) and the latter low ankle pressure (LAP). ABI was assessed in 216 subjects and calculated according to the HAP and the LAP method. ABI findings were confirmed by arterial duplex ultrasonography. A significant arterial stenosis was assumed if ABI was <0.9.LAP had a sensitivity of 0.89 and a specificity of 0.93. The HAP method had a sensitivity of 0.68 and a specificity of 0.99. McNemar's test to compare the results of both methods demonstrated a two-tailed P < .0001, indicating a highly significant difference between both measurement methods.LAP is the superior method of calculating ABI to identify PAD. This result is of great interest for epidemiologic studies applying ABI measurements to detect PAD and assessing patients' cardiovascular risk.Can we measure the ankle-brachial index using only a stethoscope? A pilot study.Ankle-brachial index (ABI) is an excellent method for the diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) when it is performed with Doppler. However, this device is not always available for primary care physicians. The ABI measured with stethoscope is an easy alternative approach, but have not been proved to be useful.To assess the accuracy of the ABI measured using a stethoscope comparatively to that of the current eligible method for the diagnosis of PAD, the Doppler ABI, and describe the characteristics of this new approach.We conducted a diagnostic study of ABI measured with a stethoscope and a Doppler probe and compared the results. Eighty-eight patients were accessed by both methods.Mean stethoscope ABI, 1.01 +/- 0.15, and mean Doppler ABI, 1.03 +/- 0.20, (P = 0.047) displayed a good correlation. Measurements of stethoscope ABI diagnostic accuracy in recognizing a Doppler ABI are described. The comparison of this data with the current gold standard method results gave a sensitivity of 71.4% [95% confidence interval (CI), 41.9-91.6] and specificity of 91.0% (95% CI, 81.5-96.6), with predictive positive value of 62.5% (95% CI, 38.6-81.5) and negative predictive value of 93.8% (95% CI, 85.2-97.6). The study accuracy was 87.7%. The area under the ROC curve was 0.895 (95% CI, 0.804-0.986, P < 0.0001).According to our study, the stethoscope ABI is a useful method to detect PAD and it may be suitable for its screening in the primary care setting.Prospective assessment of lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease in diabetic patients using a novel automated optical device.A new optical device based on the photoplethysmograph (PPG) method and an innovative algorithm for the assessment of lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease was investigated prospectively in patients with type II diabetes. This new functional PPG (fPPG) technique uses a cuffless functional test to assess diabetic peripheral arterial disease without operator dependency and the incompressible arteries, issues associated with ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI) measurement. Diabetic patients (n = 24; 47 legs; age, 70 +/- 3 years) were recruited from the vascular clinic, and controls (n = 15; 30 legs; age, 66 +/- 5 years) were recruited from the orthopedic outpatient clinic. All underwent resting ABPI, fPPG, and duplex angiography (DA) as "gold standard." fPPG requires the placement of an optical probe on the toe for acquisition of pulsatile arterial perfusion for a period of 30 seconds with the leg in supine and raised at 45 degrees positions. The data were analyzed, and indices were generated by an automated computer system. In those with diabetes, fPPG correlated significantly with DA (r = -.68, P < .01) and ABPI (r = -.65, P < .01). We also found a significant correlation between ABPI and DA (r = .81, P < .01). The analysis of the receiver operator curve showed that optimum sensitivity and specificity for ABPI and fPPG were 80% and 93% and 83% and 71%, respectively, against DA. This method uses changes in pulsatile arterial blood volume using a simple cuffless functional test. The fPPG investigation period was much shorter (5 minutes) with independence of operator skills, whereas ABPI took longer (10-15 minutes) and required operator experience. Although the fPPG results are promising, further improvement (eg, by incorporation of functional skin color and temperature changes) is required to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the system.Oscillometric measurement of ankle-brachial index.Peripheral arterial disease is a coronary risk equivalent; a low ankle-brachial index (ABI) is indicative of systemic vascular disease, and should place a patient in the high-risk category. Few physicians measure ABI because it is technically challenging and time consuming. Oscillometric blood pressure monitors are readily available and easy to use. The use of a simple method of documenting ABI was assessed and compared with the conventional method.The oscillometric ABI (OABI) was measured for normal volunteers, patients attending a cardiovascular risk clinic (Cardiovascular Risk Factor Reduction Unit [CRFRU] at the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon) and patients referred to a vascular laboratory (vasc lab). The latter group had Doppler ABI (DABI) measurements and served to validate OABI. An Omron HEM 711C oscillometric system (Omron Canada Inc) with appropriate cuff size for arm and leg circumference was used.The mean +/- SEM OABI was 1.13+/-0.08 in normal volunteers (n=26), 1.10+/-0.10 in CRFRU patients (n=11, P not significant) and 1.03+/-0.14 in vasc lab patients (n=57, P<0.05 compared with normal volunteers). No difference was found between sexes, and there was no correlation with age. In the vasc lab group, the correlation with DABI was 0.71 (P<0.05). The sensitivity of OABI to detect DABI of less than 0.9 was 0.71, and the specificity was 0.89. OABI was found to be less sensitive at detecting low values in patients with nonpalpable pulses on physical examination.The OABI is feasible and operator-independent, but does not detect low ABI efficiently. If OABI is abnormal, low DABI is likely. The OABI is less likely to detect disease in patients with nonpalpable peripheral pulses. Such patients are better referred directly to a vascular laboratory for DABI testing.Diagnostic utility of the two methods of ankle brachial index in the detection of peripheral arterial disease of lower extremities.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a common disease that is diagnosed with a screening test called the Ankle Brachial Index (ABI). Different methods of ABI have been described in the literature. We wanted to estimate and compare the sensitivity and specificity of an alternative method of calculating the ABI (LAP ABI, low ankle pressure ABI) with the current method (named high ankle pressure (HAP)), using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) as the gold standard.We reviewed the records of all patients who had undergone DSA at a major academic center between August 2003 and October 2005. The study includes 107 patients/208 limbs. Inclusion criteria included patients with an ABI performed within 30 days prior to the DSA. Patients with non-compressible vessels and ABI >1.40 were excluded. Abnormal ABI was defined as < or = 0.9 for both methods. Disease on angiogram was defined as the presence of 50% or more stenosis of any lower extremity artery from the aorto-iliac bifurcation to the ankle arteries.The sensitivity of the HAP and LAP ABI for the diagnosis of PAD was 69 and 84%, respectively (P < 0.001). The specificity of the HAP and the LAP method was 83 and 64% respectively (P < 0.01). The overall accuracy of LAP ABI and HAP ABI was 80 and 72%, respectively.The LAP ABI has better sensitivity and overall accuracy in comparison to the HAP ABI to diagnose PAD.An evaluation of the efficacy of methods used in screening for lower-limb arterial disease in diabetes.Foot-related disease is the most common cause for hospital admission among the diabetic population. Lower-limb peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAOD) is a major risk factor in diabetic foot disease. Screening for PAOD commonly includes foot pulses and the ankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI) and/or the toe-brachial pressure index (TBI), but concerns persist regarding their accuracy. We evaluated the efficacy of several commonly used screening methods in different subject populations.We studied 130 limbs in 68 individuals with no critical ischemia over 8 months. Limbs were grouped on the basis of the presence or absence of diabetes, clinically detectable peripheral neuropathy, and PAOD identified on color duplex imaging. Comparative analyses of foot pulses, the ABPI, the TBI, and distal Doppler waveform analysis were performed.Foot pulses, the TBI, and qualitative waveform analyses were highly sensitive screening methods in individuals with and without diabetes. However, detectable peripheral neuropathy was associated with a reduced sensitivity and poor specificity of foot pulses, a reduction in sensitivity of the ABPI (71 to 38%), and a reduction in specificity of the TBI (81 to 61%) and qualitative waveform analysis (96 to 66%). Quantitative analysis failed to detect disease with severely damped and low-intensity signals.Screening tools that are effective in screening for lower-limb PAOD in the nondiabetic population are less efficacious in diabetes, particularly in the presence of detectable peripheral neuropathy. Qualitative waveform analysis and the TBI were demonstrated to be more effective screening methods than the ABPI and foot pulses particularly in high-risk limbs with detectable peripheral neuropathy.Factors affecting the validity of ankle-brachial index in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial obstructive disease.We evaluated 158 legs from 79 consecutive patients who had undergone both ankle-brachial index (ABI) measurements and angiography for claudication symptoms between January 2007 and December 2008. The diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) in the individual legs was established by angiography. Ankle-brachial index was considered abnormal if it was <0.9. The sensitivity and specificity of ABI was 61% and 87%, respectively. To assess the factors affecting the validity of ABI in the diagnosis of PAD, multivariate logistic regression analysis was conducted. The odds ratios (ORs) for the false negative result of ABI were 4.36 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.36-13.92) in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), 3.41 (95% CI 1.10-10.48) in patients with distal lesions, 3.02 (95% CI 1.07-8.49) in elderly patients, and 1.13 (95% CI 0.34-3.42) in patients with mild stenosis. Although ABI is the method of choice for the primary diagnosis of PAD, other supplementary investigations should be considered when there is clinical suspicion of PAD but an ABI <0.9.Sensitivity and specificity of ankle-brachial index for detecting angiographic stenosis of peripheral arteries.The aim of the present study was to prospectively evaluate the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios (LR+, LR-) of the ankle - brachial index (ABI), using conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) as the reference standard, in the assessment of lower extremity arteries, and to research the threshold value of the ABI in diagnosing periphery arterial disease (PAD), as well as the relationship between the ABI value and stenosis in the artery of the lower extremity in Chinese high-risk cardiovascular patients.A total of 298 consecutive patients (199 men, 99 women, 64.9+/-11.3 years old) underwent conventional DSA and ABI measurement. Receiver operator characteristics (ROC) analysis was performed to assess possible threshold values that predict PAD in these patients. The greater the stenosis in the artery of the lower extremity, the lower the measured ABI value. DSA was used as the gold standard in defining lesions >or=30%, >or=50%, and >or=70% and the respective areas under the ROC curve were 0.786 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.712, 0.860), 0.927 (95% CI 0.869, 0.984), and 0.963 (95% CI 0.927, 0.999). Conventional DSA was the gold standard in defining >or=50% luminal stenosis for the diagnosis of lower extremity PAD. The 0.95 is the overall cutoff of the ABI that was associated with 91% sensitivity, 86% specificity, 6.5 LR+ and 0.1 LR- for detection of hemodynamically significant stenosis (lesions >or=50%) in all 298 subjects (p<0.001).The ABI value shows a decreasing tendency with increasing severity of stenosis in patients with PAD. ABI measurement is an accurate and reliable noninvasive alternative to conventional DSA in the assessment of lower extremity arteries and the cut-off of 0.95 is the threshold ABI value for detecting PAD in Chinese patients.[Ankle-brachial index to detect peripheral arterial disease: concordance and validation study between Doppler and an oscillometric device].To evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of ankle-brachial index (ABI) determined by oscillometry, using a Doppler ultrasound probe as a gold standard. We also aimed to evaluate the agreement between both methods.Right and left ABI measurements (ABIr,ABIl) with oscillometric (OMRON-705-CP) and Doppler (DIADOP-50) devices in hypertensive patients without peripheral arterial disease.One hundred patients, 61 women, 66.4 (SD 10.9) year-old, smokers 16%, diabetics 38%. Oscillometric and doppler ABI could be calculated in 83% and 93% of patients, respectively. Oscillometric ABIr and ABIl measurements were <0.9 in 9.6% (CI 95%, 4.2-18.1) and 8.4% (CI 95%, 3.4-16.6), respectively, and Doppler measurements were 10.8% (CI 95%, 5.3-18.9) and 15.4% (CI 95%, 8.7-24.5) respectively. The oscillometric ABIr and ABIl sensitivity was 37.5% (CI 95%, 13.7-69.4) and 20.0% (CI 95%, 5.7-51.0) respectively, and the specificity was 93.0% (CI 95%, 84.6-97.8) and 97.1% (CI 95%, 89.9-99.2), respectively. The intraclass correlation (index Doppler/oscillometric device) was 0.64 (CI 95%, 0.44-0.77) for ABIr and 0.62 (CI 95%, 0.41-0.76) for ABIl.About 8.4-15.4% of hypertensive patients attended have an abnormal Doppler ABI measurement. There is not a good concordance between Doppler and oscillometric ABI measurements. This oscillometric device does not seem useful as an ABI screening method.Accuracy of ankle-brachial index using an automatic blood pressure device to detect peripheral artery disease in preventive medicine.Previously, we validated determination of ankle-brachial index using an automatic blood pressure device.To test the feasibility and accuracy of the automatic method in assessing pathological ankle-brachial indexes in routine preventive examinations.Two physicians enrolled 354 subjects (74% men) randomly for automatic ankle-brachial index measurements using an OMRON HM 722 device. Ankle-brachial index was calculated by dividing the highest value obtained at each ankle by the highest arm value. Each subject with an abnormal (less than 0.90) automatic index and the six subsequent subjects underwent Doppler index determination.Automatic ankle-brachial index determination was possible in both ankles in 350 subjects (99%; mean time 8.1+/-2.1 minutes). The incidence of abnormal automatic ankle-brachial index was 8% (n=28). Correlations between the automatic and Doppler methods were good in left and right legs (r=0.84 and 0.78, respectively; p<0.001). In subjects with an abnormal automatic index, correlations with Doppler indexes were good in both legs (r=0.67, p<0.001). In terms of detecting an abnormal index in a routine preventive examination, the automatic method had good sensitivity (92%), specificity (98%), positive predictive value (86%), negative predictive value (99%) and accuracy (97% compared with the Doppler method). Good results were obtained in subjects with an abnormal index in terms of agreement and concordance with the Doppler method (kappa=0.87).The use of a commercially available automatic blood pressure device to detect peripheral artery disease appears feasible and quick in routine medical examinations.Pulse oximetry as a potential screening tool for lower extremity arterial disease in asymptomatic patients with diabetes mellitus.Lower extremity arterial disease (LEAD) is common and underdiagnosed in patients with diabetes mellitus and is associated with higher total mortality.We compared the accuracy of pulse oximetry, the ankle-brachial index (ABI), and the combination of the two to diagnose LEAD in consecutive outpatients with type 2 diabetes who had no symptoms of LEAD, in a primary care setting. Exclusions were age younger than 40 years, known LEAD, or typical symptoms of LEAD. Fifty-seven patients were enrolled. All patients had (1) ABI measurement; (2) pulse oximetry to measure Sao2 of their index fingers and big toes in the supine position and at 12-in elevation; and (3) Doppler waveform analysis of the lower extremity arteries. The ABI was considered abnormal if it was less than 0.9. Pulse oximetry of the toes was considered abnormal if the Sao2 was more than 2% lower from the finger or on 12-in elevation of the foot. The combination was considered positive if either the ABI or pulse oximetry was positive for LEAD and negative if both were negative. We defined LEAD as monophasic waveforms on waveform analysis.Of our patients, 31% had LEAD. Pulse oximetry had a sensitivity of 77% (95% confidence interval [CI], 61%-88%) and a specificity of 97% (95% CI, 91%-99%); ABI had a sensitivity of 63% (95% CI, 46%-77%) and a specificity of 97% (95% CI, 91%-99%). Positive likelihood ratios were 30 (95% CI, 7.6-121) for pulse oximetry and 24.8 (95% CI, 6.2-99.8) for ABI; negative likelihood ratios were 0.23 (95% CI, 0.12-0.43) for pulse oximetry and 0.38 (95% CI, 0.25-0.59) for ABI. For the combination, sensitivity was 86% (95% CI, 71%-94%) and specificity was 92% (95% CI, 84%-96%).Pulse oximetry of the toes seems as accurate as ABI to screen for LEAD in patients with type 2 diabetes. Combination of the two tests increases sensitivity.Does the measurement of digital arterial pressure using the Doppler ultrasonic technique without testing for vasospasm to detect digital arterial occlusions make good sense?An attempt was made to determine whether measurement of the systolic pressure with the Doppler ultrasonic technique can be used to detect occlusions of the digital arteries.A total of 92 patients (44 women, 48 men) with an average age of 47.5 years (range: 19-82 years) were investigated. Of these, 17 were diagnosed with a primary Raynaud's syndrome, 45 with a secondary, and 5 patients with a suspected secondary Raynaud's syndrome; 25 patients had digital occlusions of varying genesis. In all patients, the Doppler ultrasonic technique was applied to measure the systolic pressure of the digital arteries of both hands at a room temperature of 21-24 degrees Celsius without any additional thermal (warm or cold) provocation or use of vasodilatory agents; the results obtained were compared with arteriographs of the hands.While the sensitivity of the Doppler ultrasonic technique was a very low 55%, the specificity was a very high 95%. With a prevalence of 68%, the positive predictive value was 96%, the negative predictive value 50%. In the case of angiographically patent digital arteries with no spastic narrowing, the Doppler ultrasonic-measured systolic pressure was up to 30 mmHg above, and up to 25 mmHg below, the systolic pressure measured in the ipsilateral brachial artery. A pressure gradient between upper arm and digital arteries of this order of magnitude therefore does not exclude pathological changes. Only angiography was able reliably to detect vascular stenoses and occlusions.Reliable exclusion of digital arterial occlusions using the Doppler ultrasonic technique without testing for vasospasm is not possible. Only occlusions of digital arteries together with simultaneous occlusions of hand arteries can be reliably detected. Owing to the considerable scatter of the systolic blood pressure gradient between brachial and digital arteries, the Doppler ultrasonic technique cannot be used to distinguish between patent and occluded digital arteries without the use of additional vasodilation.Automated oscillometric determination of the ankle-brachial index provides accuracy necessary for office practice.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) remains underdiagnosed by primary care and cardiovascular physicians. The office-based assessment of PAD is limited by the need for specialized equipment and the time required for performance of the ankle-brachial index (ABI). We explored whether the accuracy of automated ABI measurement by oscillometry compared favorably with the gold-standard method using continuous-wave Doppler ultrasound. Consecutive patients referred to our university hospital noninvasive vascular laboratory for ABI measurement were invited for participation. Of 205 patients, 201 participated, including 55 with PAD. The ABI was measured by automated oscillometry and Doppler ultrasound. The test of trends revealed a correlation coefficient of 0.78 in the left leg and 0.78 in the right leg (P<0.01 for both). The mean ABI difference between methods was 0.04+/-0.01 and 0.06+/-0.01, respectively, in the left and right legs. The differences between the methods followed a normal distribution. Oscillometric determination of the ABI provides an accurate determination of the ABI in an outpatient population. Our findings show automated oscillometry to be a reliable and easier method of ABI measurement, lowering the barrier to incorporation of this diagnostic test into clinical practice.Evaluation of a new screening method for detecting peripheral arterial disease in a primary health care population of patients with diabetes mellitus.To compare the ability to detect peripheral arterial disease between the traditional ankle Doppler technique for measuring ankle blood pressure and a new pulse oximetric method for measuring systolic toe pressure, in an unselected primary health care population with diabetes mellitus.The total population with the diagnosis diabetes mellitus in two primary health care districts was studied. The population was investigated by means of pulse palpation, ankle Doppler pressure, systolic toe pressure using a pulse oximetric method, arm blood pressures, neuropathy screening and laboratory tests.A total of 126 patients were included in the study. In these patients, 250 extremities were investigated. Systolic ankle Doppler pressure and ankle/arm pressure indices were found to be significantly higher than the pressures and indices achieved with the pulse oximetric method (158 +/- 44 vs. 117 +/- 33 mmHg, P < 0.0001, and 1.02 +/- 0.24 vs. 0.76 +/- 0.22, P < 0.0001). Thirty-one extremities with a systolic toe pressure < 80 mmHg were found. Twenty-one of these lacked a palpable pulse in the dorsal pedial or posterior tibial artery. The pulse oximetric method gave significantly more pathological indices (Doppler index < or = 0.8, pulse oximeter index < or = 0.6) (Doppler 36/250, pulse oximeter 58/250, P = 0.003). However, the Doppler method gave significantly more indices above 1.3 compared with the pulse oximetric method (33/250 vs. 2/250, P = 0.003).This study demonstrates that ankle Doppler pressure measurements overestimate peripheral arterial pressure in a typical primary health care population. In the screening situation, this new pulse oximetric toe pressure method seems to be valuable since it can be performed in out-patient clinics and handle large numbers of patients in a short time and avoid the problem of media sclerosis.The accuracy of the physical examination for the detection of lower extremity peripheral arterial disease.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a major risk factor for adverse cardiovascular events. There has been a definite push for wider use of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) as a simple screening tool for PAD. Perhaps this has occurred to the detriment of a thorough physical examination.To assess the accuracy of the physical examination to detect clinically significant PAD compared with the ABI.PADfile, the PAD module of CARDIOfile (the Kingston Heart Clinic's cardiology database [Kingston, Ontario]), was searched for all patients who underwent peripheral arterial testing. Of 1619 patients, 1236 had all of the necessary data entered. Patients' lower limbs were divided into two groups: those with a normal ABI between 0.91 and 1.30, and those with an abnormal ABI of 0.90 or lower. Peripheral pulses were graded as either absent or present. Absent was graded as 0⁄3, present but reduced (1⁄3), normal (2⁄3) or bounding (3⁄3). Femoral bruits were graded as either present (1) or absent (0). Using the ABI as the gold standard, the sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value (NPV), positive predictive value and overall accuracy were calculated for the dorsalis pedis pulse, the posterior tibial pulse, both pedal pulses, the presence or absence of a femoral bruit and, finally, for a combination of both pedal pulses and the presence or absence of a femoral bruit.In 1236 patients who underwent PAD testing and who underwent a complete peripheral vascular physical examination (all dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses palpated and auscultation for a femoral bruit), the sensitivity, specificity, NPV, positive predictive value and accuracy for PAD were 58.2%, 98.3%, 94.9%, 81.1% and 93.8%, respectively.The clinical examination of the peripheral arterial foot pulses and the auscultation for a femoral bruit had a high degree of accuracy (93.8%) for the detection or exclusion of PAD compared with the ABI using the cut-off of 0.90 or lower. If both peripheral foot pulses are present in both lower limbs and there are no femoral bruits, the specificity and NPV of 98.3% and 94.9%, respectively, make the measurement of the ABI seem redundant. The emphasis in PAD detection should be redirected toward encouraging a thorough physical examination.Measurement characteristics of the ankle-brachial index: results from the Action for Health in Diabetes study.Many protocols have been used in clinical and research settings for collecting systolic blood pressure (SBP) measurements to calculate the ankle-brachial index (ABI); however, it is not known how useful it is to replicate measurements and which measures best reflect cardiovascular risk. Standardized measurements of ankle and arm SBP from 5140 overweight or obese individuals with type 2 diabetes were used to estimate sources of variation. Measurement characteristics of leg-specific ABI, as calculated using a standard algorithm based on the highest SBP of the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial arteries, were projected using simulations. Coefficients of variability ranged from 2% to 3% when single SBP measurements were used and ABI was overestimated by 2-3%. Taking two SBP measurements at each site reduced standard errors and bias each by 30-40%. The sensitivity of detecting low ABI ranges exceeded 90% for ABI within 0.05 of the 0.90 clinical cut-point. The average and the minimum of the two (i.e. right and left) leg-specific ABI values had similar U-shaped relationships with Framingham risk scores; however, the average leg ABI had slightly greater precision. Replicating SBP measurements reduces the error and bias of ABI. Averaging leg-specific values may increase power for characterizing cardiovascular disease risk.Comparison of colour duplex ultrasound and ankle-brachial pressure index measurements in peripheral vascular disease in type 2 diabetic patients with foot infections.Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) is a common cause of morbidity and mortality and is reported to be more common among diabetic subjects compared to non-diabetic subjects. The aim of the study was to compare the specificity and sensitivity of ankle-brachial index (ABI) measured by peripheral doppler with the colour duplex ultrasound (CDU) for diagnosis of PVD.One hundred type 2 diabetic patients admitted to our diabetic centre with foot lesions underwent both colour duplex ultrasound and ankle-brachial index measurements. PVD was diagnosed if the individual had haemodynamically significant obstruction on CDU, or if the ABI was < 0.9. The sensitivity and specificity of ABI was determined using the CDU as 'gold standard'.The mean age of the study group was 59.5 +/- 10.1 years and the mean duration of diabetes was 11.7 +/- 8.1 years. Of the total 100 subjects, six subjects had calcification of peripheral vessels and they were not included while calculating for sensitivity and specificity of ABI. Twenty (21.3%) subjects diagnosed as PVD by the CDU were not classified as PVD by the ABI measurements. Conversely, only three subjects (3.2%) classified as PVD by ABI had normal arteries based on CDU scanning. Overall, ABI had low sensitivity (70.6%) but a high specificity (88.5%). The overall agreement between CDU and ABI was poor (k = 0.20).ABI is a good initial screening tool but some patients with significant stenosis in lower extremities would be missed, if ABI measurement alone is used for diagnosis of PVD.Detection of atherosclerosis by ankle brachial index: evaluation of palpatory method versus ultrasound Doppler technique.Peripheral Arterial Disease [PAD], a manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis, is highly prevalent both in community studies and in primary care practice. Estimation of ankle brachial index [ABI] by ultrasound Doppler is the standard screening method for the detection of atherosclerosis in PAD patients. A low ABI is associated with increased risk of stroke or transient ischemic attack, ischemic heart disease and lower extremity gangrene. Though prevalence is high, physician and patient awareness of the condition is low. Primary care physicians are not well versed with the use of Doppler. Initial cost of the equipment is another adverse factor in low income countries. Detection of ankle systolic pressure by palpatory method may offer a cheap, simple and useful alternative approach in office care settings for early detection of disease. This may lead to the use of risk reduction strategies to avoid significant future morbidity and mortality.The sample size of 230 participants was identified. Patients were divided into control (100 cases), high risk asymptomatic (100 cases) and symptomatic groups (30 cases). Ankle systolic pressure was measured by digital palpation of foot arteries and by the gold standard Doppler technique in all patients in the three groups. PAD was defined by an ABI of < 0.9.In control group, mean +/- SD value of ABI was 1.0115 +/- 0.08167 by Doppler method versus 0.9923 +/- 0.08609 by palpatory method (p = 0.1), in high risk asymptomatic group, 0.9838 +/- 0.08878 versus 0.9608 +/- 0.10377 (p = 0.13) and in symptomatic group, 0.9302 +/- 0.14064 versus 0.9088 +/- 0.13274 (p = 0.12). Against the more precise Doppler method, palpatory method was equally good in detecting the PAD positive cases.Early diagnosis of PAD in primary care practice by manual palpation of foot arteries is a reliable method to identitfy the population at risk and may lead to aggressive preventive therapies.Lower limb colour flow imaging: a comparison with ankle: brachial measurements and angiography.Peripheral lower limb vascular disease represents a substantial health problem. Arteriography is currently the 'gold standard' imaging modality. However, much effort is presently being channeled towards alternative non-invasive techniques. To date, this involves mainly the interpretation of ankle: brachial pressure indices and segmental pressure measurements. A prospective pilot study of 20 patients (40 limbs) comparing these two techniques with colour Doppler ultrasound was carried out. Although ankle: brachial indices could accurately predict disease (sensitivity 100%, accuracy 92.5%), it failed to localize it; neither a high thigh: brachial index nor segmental drop could localize disease to the iliac (accuracy 70%) or femoro-popliteal (accuracy 55%) vessels respectively. Colour Doppler ultrasound correctly differentiated iliac from femoro-popliteal disease. It had an overall diagnostic accuracy of 90% in the femoral and popliteal vessels for both occlusion and stenosis and diagnosed 10 of 11 iliac lesions. Colour Doppler ultrasound has many advantages over pressure measurements in that it can both diagnose and localize arterial lesions accurately. We feel that using both techniques prior to angiography can accurately separate patients into either a surgical or angioplasty group. This may help utilize angiographic resources and radiologists' time more efficiently as well as reducing radiation dose to both patients and staff.Automated ankle-brachial pressure index measurement by clinical staff for peripheral arterial disease diagnosis in nondiabetic and diabetic patients.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a prognostic marker in cardiovascular disease. The use of Doppler-measured ankle-brachial pressure index (Dop-ABI) for PAD diagnosis is limited because of time, required training, and costs. We assessed automated oscillometric measurement of the ankle-brachial pressure index (Osc-ABI) by nurses and clinical staff.Clinical staff obtained Osc-ABI with an automated oscillometric device in 146 patients (83 with diabetes) at the time of Dop-ABI measurement and ultrasound evaluation.Measurements were obtained in most legs (Dop-ABI 98%; Osc-ABI 95.5%). Dop- and Osc-ABI were significantly related in diabetic and nondiabetic patients with good agreement over a wide range of values. When Dop-ABI <or=0.90 was used as the gold standard for PAD, receiver operating characteristic curve analysis showed that PAD was accurately diagnosed with Osc-ABI in diabetic patients. When ultrasound was used to define PAD, Dop-ABI had better diagnostic performance than Osc-ABI in the whole population and in diabetic patients (P = 0.026). Both methods gave similar results in nondiabetic patients. The cutoff values for the highest sensitivity and specificity for PAD screening were between 1.0 and 1.1. Estimation of cost with the French medical care system fees showed a potential reduction by three of the screening procedures.PAD screening could be improved by using Osc-ABI measured by clinical staff with the benefit of greater cost-effectiveness but at the risk of lower diagnostic performance in diabetic patients.Manifestation of lower extremity atherosclerosis in diabetic patients with high ankle-brachial index.The ankle brachial index (ABI) is a simple, inexpensive, noninvasive tool that correlates well with angiographic disease severity and functional symptoms. The aim of this study was to identify the manifestation of lower extremity atherosclerotic lesions in patients with high ABI by retrospective clinical study.A cohort of 184 diabetic patients, (63 +/- 14) years old, 144 males, who underwent simultaneously ABI testing and low extremity arterial duplex ultrasound within one week, were enrolled randomly into this study. According to the ABI value, they were divided into three groups: the high, normal and low ABI groups. The severity and location of atherosclerotic lesions in the lower extremity were determined based on the results of low extremity artery duplex ultrasound. The chi-square test was used to compare the atherosclerosis severity grade and lesion location across the three groups.The prevalence of low extremity artery occlusion was significantly lower in the high ABI group than in the low ABI group (3.3% vs. 63.5%, P < 0.01), and the main atherosclerotic lesions were diffuse dot-like hyperechogenicity spots or small plaques (86.7%). In addition, the atherosclerotic lesions were mostly found in the distal segment of the lower extremity in patients with high ABI (46.3%).A high ABI may be an integrative marker for intimal and medial calcification, which has a high positive predictive value for artery calcification.The role of the ankle brachial pressure index in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial injury.Angiography is the "gold standard" diagnostic tool for patients presenting soft signs of arterial injury. To reduce the number of unnecessary angiographies, we aimed to evaluate the role of the ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI) in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial injury in extremity trauma with soft signs.The data of 1772 patients with the suspicion of peripheral arterial injury was recorded prospectively. Two hundred eighty-three patients (16%) with any hard sign underwent immediate surgery. ABPI was calculated in 1489 patients with soft signs. Patients with ABPI <1 were evaluated by duplex ultrasonography and/or angiography, and if arterial injury was detected, the patients underwent surgery. Patients with an ABPI > or =1 were followed up conservatively.1343 (90%) patients had ABPI > or =1; seven (0.5%) of them developed symptoms and signs of arterial injury and healed without morbidity. One hundred forty-six (10%) patients had ABPI <1; with DUS/angiography, arterial injury was detected in 39 of them (26.7%), and they underwent surgery. The sensitivity of ABPI <1 was 84.8%; specificity 92.6%; positive predictive value 26.7%; negative predictive value 99.5%; and overall accuracy 92.3%.ABPI excludes arterial injury in 99.5% of patients with soft signs of arterial injury and avoids unnecessary examinations in 90% of patients. In the management of extremities with soft signs, ABPI measurement should be the first-line diagnostic choice.Derivation and validation of REASON: a risk score identifying candidates to screen for peripheral arterial disease using ankle brachial index.The recommendation of screening with ankle brachial index (ABI) in asymptomatic individuals is controversial. The aims of the present study were to develop and validate a pre-screening test to select candidates for ABI measurement in the Spanish population 50-79 years old, and to compare its predictive capacity to current Inter-Society Consensus (ISC) screening criteria.Two population-based cross-sectional studies were used to develop (n = 4046) and validate (n = 3285) a regression model to predict ABI < 0.9. The validation dataset was also used to compare the model's predictive capacity to that of ISC screening criteria. The best model to predict ABI < 0.9 included age, sex, smoking, pulse pressure and diabetes. Assessment of discrimination and calibration in the validation dataset demonstrated a good fit (AUC: 0.76 [95% CI 0.73-0.79] and Hosmer-Lemeshow test: χ(2): 10.73 (df = 6), p-value = 0.097). Predictions (probability cut-off value of 4.1) presented better specificity and positive likelihood ratio than the ABI screening criteria of the ISC guidelines, and similar sensitivity. This resulted in fewer patients screened per diagnosis of ABI < 0.9 (10.6 vs. 8.75) and a lower proportion of the population aged 50-79 years candidate to ABI screening (63.3% vs. 55.0%).This model provides accurate ABI < 0.9 risk estimates for ages 50-79, with a better predictive capacity than that of ISC criteria. Its use could reduce possible harms and unnecessary work-ups of ABI screening as a risk stratification strategy in primary prevention of peripheral vascular disease.Oscillometric blood pressure measurement: a simple method in screening for peripheral arterial disease.Blood pressure at the ankle level is a reliable indicator of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and the ankle brachial index (ABI) is a useful non-invasive screening tool for the early detection of atherosclerosis. In the first part of the study, systolic blood pressures obtained by oscillometry and plethysmography were compared in 80 subjects referred for possible vascular disease. In the second part of the study, 31 general practitioners enrolled 1258 consecutive patients aged more than 60 years. ABI was estimated by oscillometry. Patients with an ABI lower than 0.9 were referred to the local hospital for standardized measurements. In the first part, oscillometry showed a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 62% with a positive and negative predictive value of 71% and 96%, respectively. In the second part, significant PAD was found in 111 cases corresponding to a prevalence of 12.2%. In this population, the oscillometry showed a positive predictive value of 47%. The presence of PAD was significantly correlated to exercise related leg pain, a diagnosis of hypertension and smoking, whereas no correlation could be found with a diagnosis of heart disease, stroke, or with the presence of diabetes. The prevalence of PAD was sufficiently high in subjects over the age of 60 years to warrant screening. The ankle brachial index based on measurements with an oscillometric device was shown reliable in the exclusion of PAD, thereby fulfilling an important criterion for the use in screening.Modified ankle-brachial index detects more patients at risk in a Finnish primary health care.Despite peripheral arterial disease (PAD), defined as ankle-brachial index (ABI)<or=0.9, being an independent predictor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, it is rarely used in the primary care. Various definitions for PAD (i.e., ABI<or=0.9 or ABI<or=0.95) exist. In addition, a modified ABI (ABI(mod)) using the lowest ankle pressure improves identification of patients at risk. The prevalence of PAD in primary care and association of different ABI calculations with atherosclerotic disease burden is not known.The research was conducted as a prospective cross-sectional study. Finnish health centres and 99 general practitioners were selected and trained for ABI measurement. Consecutive patients were recruited using inclusion criteria: age 50-69 years and one or more cardiovascular risk factors or age >or=70 years or calf pain during exercise. A total of 817 patients were recruited.Research methods included interview and Doppler measurement of brachial and ankle pressures.An ABI(mod)<or=0.9 yielded the highest prevalence of PAD (47.7%), had the best sensitivity and identified the highest number of patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), cerebrovascular disease (CVD), PAD, CAD/CVD/PAD and polyvascular disease (PVD) at the cost of reduced specificity. All ABI calculations were independently associated with atherosclerotic disease burden. Interestingly, ABI>or=1.4 had the strongest association with CVD.PAD is highly prevalent among patients presenting to primary care. ABI(mod) calculation detects more number of patients at risk at the cost of reduced specificity. The association of high ABI with CVD noted in this study warrants future research for validation.Ankle-arm index versus angiography for the preassessment of the fibula free flap.Peripheral arterial occlusive disease or congenital anomalies of the major crural arteries may limit the use of the fibula free flap and should be detected preoperatively. Conventional selective angiography is the definitive standard imaging method for making this diagnosis, but it has drawbacks. A safer, cheaper, more accurate, and noninvasive alternative is desirable. The authors sought to test the hypothesis that the ankle-arm index of each of the three crural arteries, combined with pencil Doppler examination of the peroneal skin perforators, would provide adequate information to restrict the use of angiography to cases in which the outcomes of either or both of these options are insufficient. The ankle-arm index data of each of the three crural arteries, as well as pencil Doppler examination of the peroneal skin perforators of both legs of nine prospectively included patients and the nonoperated legs of 13 retrospectively included patients, were compared statistically in four different ways with the preoperative angiographic findings. A combined ankle-arm index and pencil Doppler examination is not accurate enough to detect legs or arteries with subclinical peripheral arterial occlusive disease or vascular variation and, hence, is not a sufficient basis on which to develop the surgical plan for a fibula free flap.A modified calculation of ankle-brachial pressure index is far more sensitive in the detection of peripheral arterial disease.Ankle-brachial pressure index (ABI) is a simple, inexpensive, and useful tool in the detection of peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAD). The current guidelines published by the American Heart Association define ABI as the quotient of the higher of the systolic blood pressures (SBPs) of the two ankle arteries of that limb (either the anterior tibial artery or the posterior tibial artery) and the higher of the two brachial SBPs of the upper limbs. We hypothesized that considering the lower of the two ankle arterial SBPs of a side as the numerator and the higher of the brachial SBPs as the denominator would increase its diagnostic yield.The former method of eliciting ABI was termed as high ankle pressure (HAP) and the latter low ankle pressure (LAP). ABI was assessed in 216 subjects and calculated according to the HAP and the LAP method. ABI findings were confirmed by arterial duplex ultrasonography. A significant arterial stenosis was assumed if ABI was <0.9.LAP had a sensitivity of 0.89 and a specificity of 0.93. The HAP method had a sensitivity of 0.68 and a specificity of 0.99. McNemar's test to compare the results of both methods demonstrated a two-tailed P < .0001, indicating a highly significant difference between both measurement methods.LAP is the superior method of calculating ABI to identify PAD. This result is of great interest for epidemiologic studies applying ABI measurements to detect PAD and assessing patients' cardiovascular risk.Can we measure the ankle-brachial index using only a stethoscope? A pilot study.Ankle-brachial index (ABI) is an excellent method for the diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) when it is performed with Doppler. However, this device is not always available for primary care physicians. The ABI measured with stethoscope is an easy alternative approach, but have not been proved to be useful.To assess the accuracy of the ABI measured using a stethoscope comparatively to that of the current eligible method for the diagnosis of PAD, the Doppler ABI, and describe the characteristics of this new approach.We conducted a diagnostic study of ABI measured with a stethoscope and a Doppler probe and compared the results. Eighty-eight patients were accessed by both methods.Mean stethoscope ABI, 1.01 +/- 0.15, and mean Doppler ABI, 1.03 +/- 0.20, (P = 0.047) displayed a good correlation. Measurements of stethoscope ABI diagnostic accuracy in recognizing a Doppler ABI are described. The comparison of this data with the current gold standard method results gave a sensitivity of 71.4% [95% confidence interval (CI), 41.9-91.6] and specificity of 91.0% (95% CI, 81.5-96.6), with predictive positive value of 62.5% (95% CI, 38.6-81.5) and negative predictive value of 93.8% (95% CI, 85.2-97.6). The study accuracy was 87.7%. The area under the ROC curve was 0.895 (95% CI, 0.804-0.986, P < 0.0001).According to our study, the stethoscope ABI is a useful method to detect PAD and it may be suitable for its screening in the primary care setting.Prospective assessment of lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease in diabetic patients using a novel automated optical device.A new optical device based on the photoplethysmograph (PPG) method and an innovative algorithm for the assessment of lower-extremity peripheral arterial disease was investigated prospectively in patients with type II diabetes. This new functional PPG (fPPG) technique uses a cuffless functional test to assess diabetic peripheral arterial disease without operator dependency and the incompressible arteries, issues associated with ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI) measurement. Diabetic patients (n = 24; 47 legs; age, 70 +/- 3 years) were recruited from the vascular clinic, and controls (n = 15; 30 legs; age, 66 +/- 5 years) were recruited from the orthopedic outpatient clinic. All underwent resting ABPI, fPPG, and duplex angiography (DA) as "gold standard." fPPG requires the placement of an optical probe on the toe for acquisition of pulsatile arterial perfusion for a period of 30 seconds with the leg in supine and raised at 45 degrees positions. The data were analyzed, and indices were generated by an automated computer system. In those with diabetes, fPPG correlated significantly with DA (r = -.68, P < .01) and ABPI (r = -.65, P < .01). We also found a significant correlation between ABPI and DA (r = .81, P < .01). The analysis of the receiver operator curve showed that optimum sensitivity and specificity for ABPI and fPPG were 80% and 93% and 83% and 71%, respectively, against DA. This method uses changes in pulsatile arterial blood volume using a simple cuffless functional test. The fPPG investigation period was much shorter (5 minutes) with independence of operator skills, whereas ABPI took longer (10-15 minutes) and required operator experience. Although the fPPG results are promising, further improvement (eg, by incorporation of functional skin color and temperature changes) is required to improve the sensitivity and specificity of the system.Oscillometric measurement of ankle-brachial index.Peripheral arterial disease is a coronary risk equivalent; a low ankle-brachial index (ABI) is indicative of systemic vascular disease, and should place a patient in the high-risk category. Few physicians measure ABI because it is technically challenging and time consuming. Oscillometric blood pressure monitors are readily available and easy to use. The use of a simple method of documenting ABI was assessed and compared with the conventional method.The oscillometric ABI (OABI) was measured for normal volunteers, patients attending a cardiovascular risk clinic (Cardiovascular Risk Factor Reduction Unit [CRFRU] at the University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon) and patients referred to a vascular laboratory (vasc lab). The latter group had Doppler ABI (DABI) measurements and served to validate OABI. An Omron HEM 711C oscillometric system (Omron Canada Inc) with appropriate cuff size for arm and leg circumference was used.The mean +/- SEM OABI was 1.13+/-0.08 in normal volunteers (n=26), 1.10+/-0.10 in CRFRU patients (n=11, P not significant) and 1.03+/-0.14 in vasc lab patients (n=57, P<0.05 compared with normal volunteers). No difference was found between sexes, and there was no correlation with age. In the vasc lab group, the correlation with DABI was 0.71 (P<0.05). The sensitivity of OABI to detect DABI of less than 0.9 was 0.71, and the specificity was 0.89. OABI was found to be less sensitive at detecting low values in patients with nonpalpable pulses on physical examination.The OABI is feasible and operator-independent, but does not detect low ABI efficiently. If OABI is abnormal, low DABI is likely. The OABI is less likely to detect disease in patients with nonpalpable peripheral pulses. Such patients are better referred directly to a vascular laboratory for DABI testing.Diagnostic utility of the two methods of ankle brachial index in the detection of peripheral arterial disease of lower extremities.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a common disease that is diagnosed with a screening test called the Ankle Brachial Index (ABI). Different methods of ABI have been described in the literature. We wanted to estimate and compare the sensitivity and specificity of an alternative method of calculating the ABI (LAP ABI, low ankle pressure ABI) with the current method (named high ankle pressure (HAP)), using digital subtraction angiography (DSA) as the gold standard.We reviewed the records of all patients who had undergone DSA at a major academic center between August 2003 and October 2005. The study includes 107 patients/208 limbs. Inclusion criteria included patients with an ABI performed within 30 days prior to the DSA. Patients with non-compressible vessels and ABI >1.40 were excluded. Abnormal ABI was defined as < or = 0.9 for both methods. Disease on angiogram was defined as the presence of 50% or more stenosis of any lower extremity artery from the aorto-iliac bifurcation to the ankle arteries.The sensitivity of the HAP and LAP ABI for the diagnosis of PAD was 69 and 84%, respectively (P < 0.001). The specificity of the HAP and the LAP method was 83 and 64% respectively (P < 0.01). The overall accuracy of LAP ABI and HAP ABI was 80 and 72%, respectively.The LAP ABI has better sensitivity and overall accuracy in comparison to the HAP ABI to diagnose PAD.An evaluation of the efficacy of methods used in screening for lower-limb arterial disease in diabetes.Foot-related disease is the most common cause for hospital admission among the diabetic population. Lower-limb peripheral arterial occlusive disease (PAOD) is a major risk factor in diabetic foot disease. Screening for PAOD commonly includes foot pulses and the ankle-brachial pressure index (ABPI) and/or the toe-brachial pressure index (TBI), but concerns persist regarding their accuracy. We evaluated the efficacy of several commonly used screening methods in different subject populations.We studied 130 limbs in 68 individuals with no critical ischemia over 8 months. Limbs were grouped on the basis of the presence or absence of diabetes, clinically detectable peripheral neuropathy, and PAOD identified on color duplex imaging. Comparative analyses of foot pulses, the ABPI, the TBI, and distal Doppler waveform analysis were performed.Foot pulses, the TBI, and qualitative waveform analyses were highly sensitive screening methods in individuals with and without diabetes. However, detectable peripheral neuropathy was associated with a reduced sensitivity and poor specificity of foot pulses, a reduction in sensitivity of the ABPI (71 to 38%), and a reduction in specificity of the TBI (81 to 61%) and qualitative waveform analysis (96 to 66%). Quantitative analysis failed to detect disease with severely damped and low-intensity signals.Screening tools that are effective in screening for lower-limb PAOD in the nondiabetic population are less efficacious in diabetes, particularly in the presence of detectable peripheral neuropathy. Qualitative waveform analysis and the TBI were demonstrated to be more effective screening methods than the ABPI and foot pulses particularly in high-risk limbs with detectable peripheral neuropathy.Factors affecting the validity of ankle-brachial index in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial obstructive disease.We evaluated 158 legs from 79 consecutive patients who had undergone both ankle-brachial index (ABI) measurements and angiography for claudication symptoms between January 2007 and December 2008. The diagnosis of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) in the individual legs was established by angiography. Ankle-brachial index was considered abnormal if it was <0.9. The sensitivity and specificity of ABI was 61% and 87%, respectively. To assess the factors affecting the validity of ABI in the diagnosis of PAD, multivariate logistic regression analysis was conducted. The odds ratios (ORs) for the false negative result of ABI were 4.36 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.36-13.92) in patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), 3.41 (95% CI 1.10-10.48) in patients with distal lesions, 3.02 (95% CI 1.07-8.49) in elderly patients, and 1.13 (95% CI 0.34-3.42) in patients with mild stenosis. Although ABI is the method of choice for the primary diagnosis of PAD, other supplementary investigations should be considered when there is clinical suspicion of PAD but an ABI <0.9.Sensitivity and specificity of ankle-brachial index for detecting angiographic stenosis of peripheral arteries.The aim of the present study was to prospectively evaluate the sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios (LR+, LR-) of the ankle - brachial index (ABI), using conventional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) as the reference standard, in the assessment of lower extremity arteries, and to research the threshold value of the ABI in diagnosing periphery arterial disease (PAD), as well as the relationship between the ABI value and stenosis in the artery of the lower extremity in Chinese high-risk cardiovascular patients.A total of 298 consecutive patients (199 men, 99 women, 64.9+/-11.3 years old) underwent conventional DSA and ABI measurement. Receiver operator characteristics (ROC) analysis was performed to assess possible threshold values that predict PAD in these patients. The greater the stenosis in the artery of the lower extremity, the lower the measured ABI value. DSA was used as the gold standard in defining lesions >or=30%, >or=50%, and >or=70% and the respective areas under the ROC curve were 0.786 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.712, 0.860), 0.927 (95% CI 0.869, 0.984), and 0.963 (95% CI 0.927, 0.999). Conventional DSA was the gold standard in defining >or=50% luminal stenosis for the diagnosis of lower extremity PAD. The 0.95 is the overall cutoff of the ABI that was associated with 91% sensitivity, 86% specificity, 6.5 LR+ and 0.1 LR- for detection of hemodynamically significant stenosis (lesions >or=50%) in all 298 subjects (p<0.001).The ABI value shows a decreasing tendency with increasing severity of stenosis in patients with PAD. ABI measurement is an accurate and reliable noninvasive alternative to conventional DSA in the assessment of lower extremity arteries and the cut-off of 0.95 is the threshold ABI value for detecting PAD in Chinese patients.[Ankle-brachial index to detect peripheral arterial disease: concordance and validation study between Doppler and an oscillometric device].To evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of ankle-brachial index (ABI) determined by oscillometry, using a Doppler ultrasound probe as a gold standard. We also aimed to evaluate the agreement between both methods.Right and left ABI measurements (ABIr,ABIl) with oscillometric (OMRON-705-CP) and Doppler (DIADOP-50) devices in hypertensive patients without peripheral arterial disease.One hundred patients, 61 women, 66.4 (SD 10.9) year-old, smokers 16%, diabetics 38%. Oscillometric and doppler ABI could be calculated in 83% and 93% of patients, respectively. Oscillometric ABIr and ABIl measurements were <0.9 in 9.6% (CI 95%, 4.2-18.1) and 8.4% (CI 95%, 3.4-16.6), respectively, and Doppler measurements were 10.8% (CI 95%, 5.3-18.9) and 15.4% (CI 95%, 8.7-24.5) respectively. The oscillometric ABIr and ABIl sensitivity was 37.5% (CI 95%, 13.7-69.4) and 20.0% (CI 95%, 5.7-51.0) respectively, and the specificity was 93.0% (CI 95%, 84.6-97.8) and 97.1% (CI 95%, 89.9-99.2), respectively. The intraclass correlation (index Doppler/oscillometric device) was 0.64 (CI 95%, 0.44-0.77) for ABIr and 0.62 (CI 95%, 0.41-0.76) for ABIl.About 8.4-15.4% of hypertensive patients attended have an abnormal Doppler ABI measurement. There is not a good concordance between Doppler and oscillometric ABI measurements. This oscillometric device does not seem useful as an ABI screening method.Accuracy of ankle-brachial index using an automatic blood pressure device to detect peripheral artery disease in preventive medicine.Previously, we validated determination of ankle-brachial index using an automatic blood pressure device.To test the feasibility and accuracy of the automatic method in assessing pathological ankle-brachial indexes in routine preventive examinations.Two physicians enrolled 354 subjects (74% men) randomly for automatic ankle-brachial index measurements using an OMRON HM 722 device. Ankle-brachial index was calculated by dividing the highest value obtained at each ankle by the highest arm value. Each subject with an abnormal (less than 0.90) automatic index and the six subsequent subjects underwent Doppler index determination.Automatic ankle-brachial index determination was possible in both ankles in 350 subjects (99%; mean time 8.1+/-2.1 minutes). The incidence of abnormal automatic ankle-brachial index was 8% (n=28). Correlations between the automatic and Doppler methods were good in left and right legs (r=0.84 and 0.78, respectively; p<0.001). In subjects with an abnormal automatic index, correlations with Doppler indexes were good in both legs (r=0.67, p<0.001). In terms of detecting an abnormal index in a routine preventive examination, the automatic method had good sensitivity (92%), specificity (98%), positive predictive value (86%), negative predictive value (99%) and accuracy (97% compared with the Doppler method). Good results were obtained in subjects with an abnormal index in terms of agreement and concordance with the Doppler method (kappa=0.87).The use of a commercially available automatic blood pressure device to detect peripheral artery disease appears feasible and quick in routine medical examinations.Pulse oximetry as a potential screening tool for lower extremity arterial disease in asymptomatic patients with diabetes mellitus.Lower extremity arterial disease (LEAD) is common and underdiagnosed in patients with diabetes mellitus and is associated with higher total mortality.We compared the accuracy of pulse oximetry, the ankle-brachial index (ABI), and the combination of the two to diagnose LEAD in consecutive outpatients with type 2 diabetes who had no symptoms of LEAD, in a primary care setting. Exclusions were age younger than 40 years, known LEAD, or typical symptoms of LEAD. Fifty-seven patients were enrolled. All patients had (1) ABI measurement; (2) pulse oximetry to measure Sao2 of their index fingers and big toes in the supine position and at 12-in elevation; and (3) Doppler waveform analysis of the lower extremity arteries. The ABI was considered abnormal if it was less than 0.9. Pulse oximetry of the toes was considered abnormal if the Sao2 was more than 2% lower from the finger or on 12-in elevation of the foot. The combination was considered positive if either the ABI or pulse oximetry was positive for LEAD and negative if both were negative. We defined LEAD as monophasic waveforms on waveform analysis.Of our patients, 31% had LEAD. Pulse oximetry had a sensitivity of 77% (95% confidence interval [CI], 61%-88%) and a specificity of 97% (95% CI, 91%-99%); ABI had a sensitivity of 63% (95% CI, 46%-77%) and a specificity of 97% (95% CI, 91%-99%). Positive likelihood ratios were 30 (95% CI, 7.6-121) for pulse oximetry and 24.8 (95% CI, 6.2-99.8) for ABI; negative likelihood ratios were 0.23 (95% CI, 0.12-0.43) for pulse oximetry and 0.38 (95% CI, 0.25-0.59) for ABI. For the combination, sensitivity was 86% (95% CI, 71%-94%) and specificity was 92% (95% CI, 84%-96%).Pulse oximetry of the toes seems as accurate as ABI to screen for LEAD in patients with type 2 diabetes. Combination of the two tests increases sensitivity.Does the measurement of digital arterial pressure using the Doppler ultrasonic technique without testing for vasospasm to detect digital arterial occlusions make good sense?An attempt was made to determine whether measurement of the systolic pressure with the Doppler ultrasonic technique can be used to detect occlusions of the digital arteries.A total of 92 patients (44 women, 48 men) with an average age of 47.5 years (range: 19-82 years) were investigated. Of these, 17 were diagnosed with a primary Raynaud's syndrome, 45 with a secondary, and 5 patients with a suspected secondary Raynaud's syndrome; 25 patients had digital occlusions of varying genesis. In all patients, the Doppler ultrasonic technique was applied to measure the systolic pressure of the digital arteries of both hands at a room temperature of 21-24 degrees Celsius without any additional thermal (warm or cold) provocation or use of vasodilatory agents; the results obtained were compared with arteriographs of the hands.While the sensitivity of the Doppler ultrasonic technique was a very low 55%, the specificity was a very high 95%. With a prevalence of 68%, the positive predictive value was 96%, the negative predictive value 50%. In the case of angiographically patent digital arteries with no spastic narrowing, the Doppler ultrasonic-measured systolic pressure was up to 30 mmHg above, and up to 25 mmHg below, the systolic pressure measured in the ipsilateral brachial artery. A pressure gradient between upper arm and digital arteries of this order of magnitude therefore does not exclude pathological changes. Only angiography was able reliably to detect vascular stenoses and occlusions.Reliable exclusion of digital arterial occlusions using the Doppler ultrasonic technique without testing for vasospasm is not possible. Only occlusions of digital arteries together with simultaneous occlusions of hand arteries can be reliably detected. Owing to the considerable scatter of the systolic blood pressure gradient between brachial and digital arteries, the Doppler ultrasonic technique cannot be used to distinguish between patent and occluded digital arteries without the use of additional vasodilation.Automated oscillometric determination of the ankle-brachial index provides accuracy necessary for office practice.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) remains underdiagnosed by primary care and cardiovascular physicians. The office-based assessment of PAD is limited by the need for specialized equipment and the time required for performance of the ankle-brachial index (ABI). We explored whether the accuracy of automated ABI measurement by oscillometry compared favorably with the gold-standard method using continuous-wave Doppler ultrasound. Consecutive patients referred to our university hospital noninvasive vascular laboratory for ABI measurement were invited for participation. Of 205 patients, 201 participated, including 55 with PAD. The ABI was measured by automated oscillometry and Doppler ultrasound. The test of trends revealed a correlation coefficient of 0.78 in the left leg and 0.78 in the right leg (P<0.01 for both). The mean ABI difference between methods was 0.04+/-0.01 and 0.06+/-0.01, respectively, in the left and right legs. The differences between the methods followed a normal distribution. Oscillometric determination of the ABI provides an accurate determination of the ABI in an outpatient population. Our findings show automated oscillometry to be a reliable and easier method of ABI measurement, lowering the barrier to incorporation of this diagnostic test into clinical practice.Evaluation of a new screening method for detecting peripheral arterial disease in a primary health care population of patients with diabetes mellitus.To compare the ability to detect peripheral arterial disease between the traditional ankle Doppler technique for measuring ankle blood pressure and a new pulse oximetric method for measuring systolic toe pressure, in an unselected primary health care population with diabetes mellitus.The total population with the diagnosis diabetes mellitus in two primary health care districts was studied. The population was investigated by means of pulse palpation, ankle Doppler pressure, systolic toe pressure using a pulse oximetric method, arm blood pressures, neuropathy screening and laboratory tests.A total of 126 patients were included in the study. In these patients, 250 extremities were investigated. Systolic ankle Doppler pressure and ankle/arm pressure indices were found to be significantly higher than the pressures and indices achieved with the pulse oximetric method (158 +/- 44 vs. 117 +/- 33 mmHg, P < 0.0001, and 1.02 +/- 0.24 vs. 0.76 +/- 0.22, P < 0.0001). Thirty-one extremities with a systolic toe pressure < 80 mmHg were found. Twenty-one of these lacked a palpable pulse in the dorsal pedial or posterior tibial artery. The pulse oximetric method gave significantly more pathological indices (Doppler index < or = 0.8, pulse oximeter index < or = 0.6) (Doppler 36/250, pulse oximeter 58/250, P = 0.003). However, the Doppler method gave significantly more indices above 1.3 compared with the pulse oximetric method (33/250 vs. 2/250, P = 0.003).This study demonstrates that ankle Doppler pressure measurements overestimate peripheral arterial pressure in a typical primary health care population. In the screening situation, this new pulse oximetric toe pressure method seems to be valuable since it can be performed in out-patient clinics and handle large numbers of patients in a short time and avoid the problem of media sclerosis.The accuracy of the physical examination for the detection of lower extremity peripheral arterial disease.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a major risk factor for adverse cardiovascular events. There has been a definite push for wider use of the ankle-brachial index (ABI) as a simple screening tool for PAD. Perhaps this has occurred to the detriment of a thorough physical examination.To assess the accuracy of the physical examination to detect clinically significant PAD compared with the ABI.PADfile, the PAD module of CARDIOfile (the Kingston Heart Clinic's cardiology database [Kingston, Ontario]), was searched for all patients who underwent peripheral arterial testing. Of 1619 patients, 1236 had all of the necessary data entered. Patients' lower limbs were divided into two groups: those with a normal ABI between 0.91 and 1.30, and those with an abnormal ABI of 0.90 or lower. Peripheral pulses were graded as either absent or present. Absent was graded as 0⁄3, present but reduced (1⁄3), normal (2⁄3) or bounding (3⁄3). Femoral bruits were graded as either present (1) or absent (0). Using the ABI as the gold standard, the sensitivity, specificity, negative predictive value (NPV), positive predictive value and overall accuracy were calculated for the dorsalis pedis pulse, the posterior tibial pulse, both pedal pulses, the presence or absence of a femoral bruit and, finally, for a combination of both pedal pulses and the presence or absence of a femoral bruit.In 1236 patients who underwent PAD testing and who underwent a complete peripheral vascular physical examination (all dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses palpated and auscultation for a femoral bruit), the sensitivity, specificity, NPV, positive predictive value and accuracy for PAD were 58.2%, 98.3%, 94.9%, 81.1% and 93.8%, respectively.The clinical examination of the peripheral arterial foot pulses and the auscultation for a femoral bruit had a high degree of accuracy (93.8%) for the detection or exclusion of PAD compared with the ABI using the cut-off of 0.90 or lower. If both peripheral foot pulses are present in both lower limbs and there are no femoral bruits, the specificity and NPV of 98.3% and 94.9%, respectively, make the measurement of the ABI seem redundant. The emphasis in PAD detection should be redirected toward encouraging a thorough physical examination.Measurement characteristics of the ankle-brachial index: results from the Action for Health in Diabetes study.Many protocols have been used in clinical and research settings for collecting systolic blood pressure (SBP) measurements to calculate the ankle-brachial index (ABI); however, it is not known how useful it is to replicate measurements and which measures best reflect cardiovascular risk. Standardized measurements of ankle and arm SBP from 5140 overweight or obese individuals with type 2 diabetes were used to estimate sources of variation. Measurement characteristics of leg-specific ABI, as calculated using a standard algorithm based on the highest SBP of the dorsalis pedis or posterior tibial arteries, were projected using simulations. Coefficients of variability ranged from 2% to 3% when single SBP measurements were used and ABI was overestimated by 2-3%. Taking two SBP measurements at each site reduced standard errors and bias each by 30-40%. The sensitivity of detecting low ABI ranges exceeded 90% for ABI within 0.05 of the 0.90 clinical cut-point. The average and the minimum of the two (i.e. right and left) leg-specific ABI values had similar U-shaped relationships with Framingham risk scores; however, the average leg ABI had slightly greater precision. Replicating SBP measurements reduces the error and bias of ABI. Averaging leg-specific values may increase power for characterizing cardiovascular disease risk.Comparison of colour duplex ultrasound and ankle-brachial pressure index measurements in peripheral vascular disease in type 2 diabetic patients with foot infections.Peripheral vascular disease (PVD) is a common cause of morbidity and mortality and is reported to be more common among diabetic subjects compared to non-diabetic subjects. The aim of the study was to compare the specificity and sensitivity of ankle-brachial index (ABI) measured by peripheral doppler with the colour duplex ultrasound (CDU) for diagnosis of PVD.One hundred type 2 diabetic patients admitted to our diabetic centre with foot lesions underwent both colour duplex ultrasound and ankle-brachial index measurements. PVD was diagnosed if the individual had haemodynamically significant obstruction on CDU, or if the ABI was < 0.9. The sensitivity and specificity of ABI was determined using the CDU as 'gold standard'.The mean age of the study group was 59.5 +/- 10.1 years and the mean duration of diabetes was 11.7 +/- 8.1 years. Of the total 100 subjects, six subjects had calcification of peripheral vessels and they were not included while calculating for sensitivity and specificity of ABI. Twenty (21.3%) subjects diagnosed as PVD by the CDU were not classified as PVD by the ABI measurements. Conversely, only three subjects (3.2%) classified as PVD by ABI had normal arteries based on CDU scanning. Overall, ABI had low sensitivity (70.6%) but a high specificity (88.5%). The overall agreement between CDU and ABI was poor (k = 0.20).ABI is a good initial screening tool but some patients with significant stenosis in lower extremities would be missed, if ABI measurement alone is used for diagnosis of PVD.Detection of atherosclerosis by ankle brachial index: evaluation of palpatory method versus ultrasound Doppler technique.Peripheral Arterial Disease [PAD], a manifestation of systemic atherosclerosis, is highly prevalent both in community studies and in primary care practice. Estimation of ankle brachial index [ABI] by ultrasound Doppler is the standard screening method for the detection of atherosclerosis in PAD patients. A low ABI is associated with increased risk of stroke or transient ischemic attack, ischemic heart disease and lower extremity gangrene. Though prevalence is high, physician and patient awareness of the condition is low. Primary care physicians are not well versed with the use of Doppler. Initial cost of the equipment is another adverse factor in low income countries. Detection of ankle systolic pressure by palpatory method may offer a cheap, simple and useful alternative approach in office care settings for early detection of disease. This may lead to the use of risk reduction strategies to avoid significant future morbidity and mortality.The sample size of 230 participants was identified. Patients were divided into control (100 cases), high risk asymptomatic (100 cases) and symptomatic groups (30 cases). Ankle systolic pressure was measured by digital palpation of foot arteries and by the gold standard Doppler technique in all patients in the three groups. PAD was defined by an ABI of < 0.9.In control group, mean +/- SD value of ABI was 1.0115 +/- 0.08167 by Doppler method versus 0.9923 +/- 0.08609 by palpatory method (p = 0.1), in high risk asymptomatic group, 0.9838 +/- 0.08878 versus 0.9608 +/- 0.10377 (p = 0.13) and in symptomatic group, 0.9302 +/- 0.14064 versus 0.9088 +/- 0.13274 (p = 0.12). Against the more precise Doppler method, palpatory method was equally good in detecting the PAD positive cases.Early diagnosis of PAD in primary care practice by manual palpation of foot arteries is a reliable method to identitfy the population at risk and may lead to aggressive preventive therapies.Lower limb colour flow imaging: a comparison with ankle: brachial measurements and angiography.Peripheral lower limb vascular disease represents a substantial health problem. Arteriography is currently the 'gold standard' imaging modality. However, much effort is presently being channeled towards alternative non-invasive techniques. To date, this involves mainly the interpretation of ankle: brachial pressure indices and segmental pressure measurements. A prospective pilot study of 20 patients (40 limbs) comparing these two techniques with colour Doppler ultrasound was carried out. Although ankle: brachial indices could accurately predict disease (sensitivity 100%, accuracy 92.5%), it failed to localize it; neither a high thigh: brachial index nor segmental drop could localize disease to the iliac (accuracy 70%) or femoro-popliteal (accuracy 55%) vessels respectively. Colour Doppler ultrasound correctly differentiated iliac from femoro-popliteal disease. It had an overall diagnostic accuracy of 90% in the femoral and popliteal vessels for both occlusion and stenosis and diagnosed 10 of 11 iliac lesions. Colour Doppler ultrasound has many advantages over pressure measurements in that it can both diagnose and localize arterial lesions accurately. We feel that using both techniques prior to angiography can accurately separate patients into either a surgical or angioplasty group. This may help utilize angiographic resources and radiologists' time more efficiently as well as reducing radiation dose to both patients and staff.Automated ankle-brachial pressure index measurement by clinical staff for peripheral arterial disease diagnosis in nondiabetic and diabetic patients.Peripheral arterial disease (PAD) is a prognostic marker in cardiovascular disease. The use of Doppler-measured ankle-brachial pressure index (Dop-ABI) for PAD diagnosis is limited because of time, required training, and costs. We assessed automated oscillometric measurement of the ankle-brachial pressure index (Osc-ABI) by nurses and clinical staff.Clinical staff obtained Osc-ABI with an automated oscillometric device in 146 patients (83 with diabetes) at the time of Dop-ABI measurement and ultrasound evaluation.Measurements were obtained in most legs (Dop-ABI 98%; Osc-ABI 95.5%). Dop- and Osc-ABI were significantly related in diabetic and nondiabetic patients with good agreement over a wide range of values. When Dop-ABI <or=0.90 was used as the gold standard for PAD, receiver operating characteristic curve analysis showed that PAD was accurately diagnosed with Osc-ABI in diabetic patients. When ultrasound was used to define PAD, Dop-ABI had better diagnostic performance than Osc-ABI in the whole population and in diabetic patients (P = 0.026). Both methods gave similar results in nondiabetic patients. The cutoff values for the highest sensitivity and specificity for PAD screening were between 1.0 and 1.1. Estimation of cost with the French medical care system fees showed a potential reduction by three of the screening procedures.PAD screening could be improved by using Osc-ABI measured by clinical staff with the benefit of greater cost-effectiveness but at the risk of lower diagnostic performance in diabetic patients.Manifestation of lower extremity atherosclerosis in diabetic patients with high ankle-brachial index.The ankle brachial index (ABI) is a simple, inexpensive, noninvasive tool that correlates well with angiographic disease severity and functional symptoms. The aim of this study was to identify the manifestation of lower extremity atherosclerotic lesions in patients with high ABI by retrospective clinical study.A cohort of 184 diabetic patients, (63 +/- 14) years old, 144 males, who underwent simultaneously ABI testing and low extremity arterial duplex ultrasound within one week, were enrolled randomly into this study. According to the ABI value, they were divided into three groups: the high, normal and low ABI groups. The severity and location of atherosclerotic lesions in the lower extremity were determined based on the results of low extremity artery duplex ultrasound. The chi-square test was used to compare the atherosclerosis severity grade and lesion location across the three groups.The prevalence of low extremity artery occlusion was significantly lower in the high ABI group than in the low ABI group (3.3% vs. 63.5%, P < 0.01), and the main atherosclerotic lesions were diffuse dot-like hyperechogenicity spots or small plaques (86.7%). In addition, the atherosclerotic lesions were mostly found in the distal segment of the lower extremity in patients with high ABI (46.3%).A high ABI may be an integrative marker for intimal and medial calcification, which has a high positive predictive value for artery calcification.The role of the ankle brachial pressure index in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial injury.Angiography is the "gold standard" diagnostic tool for patients presenting soft signs of arterial injury. To reduce the number of unnecessary angiographies, we aimed to evaluate the role of the ankle brachial pressure index (ABPI) in the diagnosis of peripheral arterial injury in extremity trauma with soft signs.The data of 1772 patients with the suspicion of peripheral arterial injury was recorded prospectively. Two hundred eighty-three patients (16%) with any hard sign underwent immediate surgery. ABPI was calculated in 1489 patients with soft signs. Patients with ABPI <1 were evaluated by duplex ultrasonography and/or angiography, and if arterial injury was detected, the patients underwent surgery. Patients with an ABPI > or =1 were followed up conservatively.1343 (90%) patients had ABPI > or =1; seven (0.5%) of them developed symptoms and signs of arterial injury and healed without morbidity. One hundred forty-six (10%) patients had ABPI <1; with DUS/angiography, arterial injury was detected in 39 of them (26.7%), and they underwent surgery. The sensitivity of ABPI <1 was 84.8%; specificity 92.6%; positive predictive value 26.7%; negative predictive value 99.5%; and overall accuracy 92.3%.ABPI excludes arterial injury in 99.5% of patients with soft signs of arterial injury and avoids unnecessary examinations in 90% of patients. In the management of extremities with soft signs, ABPI measurement should be the first-line diagnostic choice.Derivation and validation of REASON: a risk score identifying candidates to screen for peripheral arterial disease using ankle brachial index.The recommendation of screening with ankle brachial index (ABI) in asymptomatic individuals is controversial. The aims of the present study were to develop and validate a pre-screening test to select candidates for ABI measurement in the Spanish population 50-79 years old, and to compare its predictive capacity to current Inter-Society Consensus (ISC) screening criteria.Two population-based cross-sectional studies were used to develop (n = 4046) and validate (n = 3285) a regression model to predict ABI < 0.9. The validation dataset was also used to compare the model's predictive capacity to that of ISC screening criteria. The best model to predict ABI < 0.9 included age, sex, smoking, pulse pressure and diabetes. Assessment of discrimination and calibration in the validation dataset demonstrated a good fit (AUC: 0.76 [95% CI 0.73-0.79] and Hosmer-Lemeshow test: χ(2): 10.73 (df = 6), p-value = 0.097). Predictions (probability cut-off value of 4.1) presented better specificity and positive likelihood ratio than the ABI screening criteria of the ISC guidelines, and similar sensitivity. This resulted in fewer patients screened per diagnosis of ABI < 0.9 (10.6 vs. 8.75) and a lower proportion of the population aged 50-79 years candidate to ABI screening (63.3% vs. 55.0%).This model provides accurate ABI < 0.9 risk estimates for ages 50-79, with a better predictive capacity than that of ISC criteria. Its use could reduce possible harms and unnecessary work-ups of ABI screening as a risk stratification strategy in primary prevention of peripheral vascular disease.Oscillometric blood pressure measurement: a simple method in screening for peripheral arterial disease.Blood pressure at the ankle level is a reliable indicator of peripheral arterial disease (PAD) and the ankle brachial index (ABI) is a useful non-invasive screening tool for the early detection of atherosclerosis. In the first part of the study, systolic blood pressures obtained by oscillometry and plethysmography were compared in 80 subjects referred for possible vascular disease. In the second part of the study, 31 general practitioners enrolled 1258 consecutive patients aged more than 60 years. ABI was estimated by oscillometry. Patients with an ABI lower than 0.9 were referred to the local hospital for standardized measurements. In the first part, oscillometry showed a sensitivity of 97% and a specificity of 62% with a positive and negative predictive value of 71% and 96%, respectively. In the second part, significant PAD was found in 111 cases corresponding to a prevalence of 12.2%. In this population, the oscillometry showed a positive predictive value of 47%. The presence of PAD was significantly correlated to exercise related leg pain, a diagnosis of hypertension and smoking, whereas no correlation could be found with a diagnosis of heart disease, stroke, or with the presence of diabetes. The prevalence of PAD was sufficiently high in subjects over the age of 60 years to warrant screening. The ankle brachial index based on measurements with an oscillometric device was shown reliable in the exclusion of PAD, thereby fulfilling an important criterion for the use in screening.Modified ankle-brachial index detects more patients at risk in a Finnish primary health care.Despite peripheral arterial disease (PAD), defined as ankle-brachial index (ABI)<or=0.9, being an independent predictor of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, it is rarely used in the primary care. Various definitions for PAD (i.e., ABI<or=0.9 or ABI<or=0.95) exist. In addition, a modified ABI (ABI(mod)) using the lowest ankle pressure improves identification of patients at risk. The prevalence of PAD in primary care and association of different ABI calculations with atherosclerotic disease burden is not known.The research was conducted as a prospective cross-sectional study. Finnish health centres and 99 general practitioners were selected and trained for ABI measurement. Consecutive patients were recruited using inclusion criteria: age 50-69 years and one or more cardiovascular risk factors or age >or=70 years or calf pain during exercise. A total of 817 patients were recruited.Research methods included interview and Doppler measurement of brachial and ankle pressures.An ABI(mod)<or=0.9 yielded the highest prevalence of PAD (47.7%), had the best sensitivity and identified the highest number of patients with coronary artery disease (CAD), cerebrovascular disease (CVD), PAD, CAD/CVD/PAD and polyvascular disease (PVD) at the cost of reduced specificity. All ABI calculations were independently associated with atherosclerotic disease burden. Interestingly, ABI>or=1.4 had the strongest association with CVD.PAD is highly prevalent among patients presenting to primary care. ABI(mod) calculation detects more number of patients at risk at the cost of reduced specificity. The association of high ABI with CVD noted in this study warrants future research for validation.Ankle-arm index versus angiography for the preassessment of the fibula free flap.Peripheral arterial occlusive disease or congenital anomalies of the major crural arteries may limit the use of the fibula free flap and should be detected preoperatively. Conventional selective angiography is the definitive standard imaging method for making this diagnosis, but it has drawbacks. A safer, cheaper, more accurate, and noninvasive alternative is desirable. The authors sought to test the hypothesis that the ankle-arm index of each of the three crural arteries, combined with pencil Doppler examination of the peroneal skin perforators, would provide adequate information to restrict the use of angiography to cases in which the outcomes of either or both of these options are insufficient. The ankle-arm index data of each of the three crural arteries, as well as pencil Doppler examination of the peroneal skin perforators of both legs of nine prospectively included patients and the nonoperated legs of 13 retrospectively included patients, were compared statistically in four different ways with the preoperative angiographic findings. A combined ankle-arm index and pencil Doppler examination is not accurate enough to detect legs or arteries with subclinical peripheral arterial occlusive disease or vascular variation and, hence, is not a sufficient basis on which to develop the surgical plan for a fibula free flap.