A comparison of two energy levels for noncontact transscleral neodymium-YAG cyclophotocoagulation.In a prospective, clinical trial, 89 patients undergoing transscleral neodymium-YAG cyclophotocoagulation for intractable glaucoma were randomized to approximately 4 or 8 J of laser energy per application and followed up for an average of 1 year. The only statistically significant difference between the two groups was early anterior chamber reaction, which was more severe among those receiving 8 J. There was a trend toward better intraocular pressure control in the 8-J group, compared with the 4-J group, with 33 (75%) of 44 patients and 27 (60%) of 45 patients, respectively, requiring no further surgical intervention during the follow-up period. Among those patients not requiring further surgery, there was no significant difference in final visual acuities between the two groups. These findings suggest that within the range of 4 to 8 J, transscleral neodymium-YAG cyclophotocoagulation at the higher energy level may have some advantage with regard to intraocular pressure reduction without an increased risk of visual loss, compared with the same treatment at the lower energy level.Micropulse versus continuous wave transscleral diode cyclophotocoagulation in refractory glaucoma: a randomized exploratory study.The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy and safety of micropulse and continuous wave diode transscleral cyclophotocoagulation in refractory glaucoma.Randomized, comparative, exploratory study in a tertiary hospital setting.Patients with refractory, end-stage glaucoma.Forty-eight patients were randomized to either treatment. The intraocular pressure, visual acuity, number of medicines and repeat treatment were monitored for 18 months. Complications that include visual acuity decline, prolonged anterior chamber inflammation, phthisis bulbi, scleral thinning and ocular pain were noted.Intraocular pressure between 6 and 21 mmHg and at least a 30% reduction with or without anti-glaucoma medications after 18 months.A successful primary outcome was achieved in 75% of patients who underwent micropulse cyclophotocoagulation and 29% of patients who received continuous wave cyclophotocoagulation after 12 months (P < 0.01). At 18 months, successful outcome was 52% and 30% (P = 0.13), respectively. The mean intraocular pressure was reduced by 45% in both groups (P = 0.70) from a baseline of 36.5 mmHg and 35.0 mmHg (P = 0.50) after 17.5 ± 1.6 months (range 16-19) follow up. No significant difference in retreatment rates or number of intraocular pressure lowering medications was noted. The ocular complication rate was higher in continuous wave treated eyes (P = 0.01).Diode transscleral cyclophotocoagulation in both micropulse and continuous modes was effective in lowering intraocular pressure. The micropulse mode provided a more consistent and predictable effect in lowering intraocular pressure with minimal ocular complications.Clinical comparison of semiconductor diode versus neodymium: YAG non-contact cyclo photocoagulation.The advent of diode lasers has allowed their use in transscleral cyclo photocoagulation for refractory glaucoma. A trial was performed to compare the ocular hypotensive and inflammatory effects of cyclo photocoagulation using a continuous wave diode (810 nm) and a free running neodymium:yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) laser (1064 nm).Forty patients with refractory glaucoma were randomised to receive either diode or Nd:YAG therapy. The intraocular pressure (IOP) and inflammatory response to treatment were monitored over 3 months.There was no significant laser related difference in the effect on IOP after one treatment. There was, however, a difference in effect in retreatments with the IOP lowering effect significantly less, but equally sustained in diode retreatment patients. Severe postoperative complications such as hyphaema or fibrinous anterior uveitis only occurred in the Nd:YAG group.The degree and duration of the ocular hypotensive response to cyclo photocoagulation appears to be related to the available power output of the system used, and the extent of tissue damage.Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation versus cyclocryotherapy in the treatment of refractory glaucoma.The aim of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of diode laser cyclophotocoagulation (DCPC) and cyclocryotherapy (CCT) in the treatment of refractory glaucoma and compare the postoperative complications and discomfort rates.In a prospective, randomized, controlled clinical study, 40 eyes of 40 patients with refractory glaucoma were randomly assigned in 2 groups of 20 eyes each to receive either DCPC or CCT. Patients underwent follow-up examinations on the first 3 days and then 1 week and 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after initial treatment. Complications and discomfort after treatment using a visual pain analogue scale were recorded.In the DCPC group, the mean intraocular pressure (IOP) decreased (p<0.05) from 44.3 ± 16.4 mmHg preoperatively to 24.1 ± 7.6 mmHg, 22.8 ± 5.6 mmHg, and 22.5 ± 5.1 mmHg 3, 6, and 12 months posttreatment, respectively. Regarding the CCT group, the mean IOP was reduced (p<0.05) from 46.5 ± 10.4 mmHg to 26.6 ± 12.2 mmHg, 21.2 ± 7.7 mmHg, and 20.6 ± 5 mmHg at the same time intervals. In the DCPC group, the mean IOP reduction was strongly correlated with the number of laser effects (r = 0.65; p<0.01), but 35% needed retreatments. The mean postoperative pain was 5.6 ± 2.9 (DCPC) vs 5.7 ± 2.3 (CCT) (p = 0.91). No severe complications were observed.Both DCPC and CCT proved to be safe and effective IOP-lowering methods in patients with refractory glaucoma. Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation should be considered as the primary treatment option in refractory glaucoma using an individual treatment dosage.Evaluation of contact versus non-contact diode laser cyclophotocoagulation for refractory glaucomas using similar energy settings.To compare the efficacy of contact and non-contact techniques of diode transscleral cyclophotocoagulation (TSCPC) in patients with refractory glaucoma in a prospective randomized manner.Sixty eyes with refractory glaucoma were randomly treated with either the contact or non-contact technique of diode TSCPC and followed up for a minimum of 12 months. A standard protocol of 1500 mW for 2 s per spot, with 40 spots over the entire 360 degrees circumference was followed for all eyes in both groups.The reduction of mean baseline intraocular pressure (IOP) from 44.5 +/- 7.4 mmHg to 14.8 +/- 1.8 mmHg with the contact mode was not significantly different from that in the non-contact mode of 41.9 +/- 8.8 mmHg reduced to 14.5 +/- 1.5 mmHg (P = 0.34). The probability of IOP survival (<22 mmHg) at 1 year using the Kaplan-Meier plot was better using the contact mode, although the results did not achieve statistical significance. However, the average repeat treatments per eye with the non-contact mode (1.6 +/- 0.7) was significantly higher than with the contact method (1.2 +/- 0.6; P < 0.05).Using an energy setting of 3 J per spot, both the contact and non-contact methods of laser delivery were found to be equally effective in lowering IOP in eyes with refractory glaucoma.A comparison between tube surgery, ND:YAG laser and diode laser cyclophotocoagulation in the management of refractory glaucoma.To compare the results of intraocular pressure (IOP) reduction by 3 treatment modalities, (a) glaucoma tube implants, (b) noncontact YAG laser cyclophotocoagulation (cycloYAG), and (c) contact transscleral diode laser cyclophotocoagulation (cyclodiode), in cases of advanced glaucoma refractory to alternative treatments.A consecutive group of 45 eyes that received cycloYAG were matched against two control groups of patients who had received tube surgery or cyclodiode, each control group having been derived from a database of patients.Mean pretreatment IOP improved from 41.3, 38.6, and 32.0 mmHg for the tube, cycloYAG, and cyclodiode groups, respectively, to 16.4, 22.1, and 19.3 mmHg, respectively. Treatment success was achieved in 78%, 69%, and 71% of the tube, cycloYAG, and cyclodiode groups, respectively. Visual acuity deteriorated 2 or more Snellen lines in 16%, 7%, and 9% of the patients in the tube, cycloYAG, and cyclodiode groups, respectively. Complications included retinal detachment, hypotony, and phthisis.All 3 methods provided acceptable IOP lowering in the short and medium term. Control of IOP was best in patients receiving tube surgery. Cyclodiode and cycloYAG treatments were similarly effective in lowering IOP. Tube surgery was associated with a greater incidence of sight threatening complications.Diode laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation as a primary surgical treatment for primary open-angle glaucoma.To evaluate the feasibility of diode laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation (TSCPC) as a primary surgical treatment for primary open-angle glaucoma and to compare 2 laser energy settings used for treatment.In a prospective clinical trial in Cape Coast and Accra, Ghana, 1 eye of each of 92 patients with primary open-angle glaucoma was treated by diode laser TSCPC as a primary surgical treatment. Eyes were randomly assigned to receive treatment by 20 applications of either 1.5 W applied for 1.5 seconds or 1.25 W applied for 2.5 seconds.Seventy-nine (86%) of 92 patients completed 3 months of follow-up; follow-up was 13.2 +/- 6.0 months (mean +/- SD). Intraocular pressure decreased in 53 (67%) of the 79 eyes. The drop in intraocular pressure was 20% or more in 37 eyes (47%) and final intraocular pressure was 22 mm Hg or less in 38 eyes (48%). An atonic pupil was a previously unreported complication that arose in 27 (28%) of 92 eyes. There were no serious complications of hypotony, phthisis bulbi, or sympathetic ophthalmia. Visual acuity decreased in 18 (23%) of 79 eyes treated by TSCPC and in 10 (23%) of 47 fellow eyes treated only with glaucoma medications. There was no difference in outcomes between the 2 laser energy settings.Diode laser TSCPC is a practical, rapid, well-tolerated procedure that may provide a modest and variable lowering of intraocular pressure. The treatment, used with conservative energy levels applied to the eye, seems to have few serious complications, although a previously unrecognized complication of atonic pupil needs further evaluation. A moderate variation in laser energy settings does not influence the results of treatment.A clinical comparison of transscleral cyclophotocoagulation with neodymium: YAG and semiconductor diode lasers.To compare the efficacy of transscleral cyclophotocoagulation using a neodymium: YAG (Nd:YAG) or semiconductor diode laser in controlling intraocular pressure in patients with refractory glaucoma.In a prospective study, 95 eyes of 91 patients with refractory glaucoma randomly received Nd:YAG or diode cyclophotocoagulation. Patients were followed for a mean of 10.4 months (10.42 +/- 3.16, mean +/- SD). We compared available data preoperatively and at 1 week, 1 month, 6 months, and 12 months postoperatively. Data analyzed were corrected visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and the type of glaucoma.There was a statistically significant decrease in intraocular pressure after both Nd:YAG and diode cyclophotocoagulation at each time period. However, there were no significant differences in postoperative intraocular pressure or visual acuity change between Nd:YAG and diode procedures.Compared with the Nd:YAG laser for transscleral cyclophotocoagulation, the diode laser has technological advantages including portability, durability, and smaller size, while providing equivalent postoperative intraocular pressure and visual acuity change.A prospective, comparative study between endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation and the Ahmed drainage implant in refractory glaucoma.To compare endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation (ECP) and the Ahmed drainage implant in the treatment of refractory glaucoma.Sixty-eight eyes of 68 patients with refractory glaucoma were prospectively assigned to either ECP or Ahmed tube shunt implantation. All procedures were performed by a single surgeon. Eyes that were included were pseudophakic with a history of at least one trabeculectomy with antimetabolite, an intraocular pressure (IOP) equal to or above 35 mm Hg on maximum tolerated medical therapy, and a visual acuity better than light perception. Exclusion criteria included eyes that had had previous glaucoma drainage device implantation or a cyclodestructive procedure. Success was defined as an IOP more than 6 mm Hg and less than 21 mm Hg, with or without topical anti-hypertensive therapy.The mean follow-up was 19.82 +/- 8.35 months and 21.29 +/- 6.42 months, for the Ahmed and ECP groups, respectively (P = 0.4). The preoperative IOP, 41.32 +/- 3.03 mm Hg (Ahmed) and 41.61 +/- 3.42 mm Hg (ECP) (P = 0.5), and the mean postoperative IOP, at 24 months follow-up, 14.73 +/- 6.44 mm Hg (Ahmed) and 14.07 +/- 7.21 mm Hg (ECP) (P = 0.7), were significantly different from baseline in both groups (P < 0.001). Kaplan-Meier survival curve analysis showed a probability of success at 24 months of 70.59% and 73.53% for the Ahmed and ECP groups, respectively (P = 0.7). Complications included choroidal detachment (Ahmed 17.64%, ECP 2.94%), shallow anterior chamber (Ahmed 17.64%, ECP 0.0%), and hyphema (Ahmed 14.7%, ECP 17.64%).There was no difference in the success rate between the Ahmed Glaucoma Valve and ECP in refractory glaucoma. The eyes that underwent Ahmed tube shunt implantation had more complications than those treated with ECP.A comparative study between diode laser cyclophotocoagulation and the Ahmed glaucoma valve implant in neovascular glaucoma: a long-term follow-up.To compare the efficacy, safety, and long-term results of intraocular pressure (IOP) reduction by diode laser contact cyclophotocoagulation (DCPC) and Ahmed glaucoma valve (AGV) implant in cases of neovascular glaucoma.A total of 66 eyes of 66 patients with neovascular glaucoma were prospectively assigned to either DCPC or AGV implantation. All patients underwent a baseline complete ophthalmologic examination and IOP measurement by Goldmann applanation tonometry before and after 1,3, 6, 12, and 24 months follow-up. Complications and the number of medications were recorded.Mean age of the patients was 60.0+/-11.7 years (range: 20 to 85) in the DCPC group and 57.2+/-10.3 years (range: 20 to 85) in the AGV group. The preoperative IOP was 43.4+/-11.9 mm Hg and 43.3+/-7.4 mm Hg for the DCPC and AGV group, respectively (P>0.05). The postoperative IOP was 16.5+/-11.3 mm Hg and 22.09+/-7.6 mm Hg for the DCPC and AGV groups, respectively (P>0.05) at the last visit. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed a probability of success at 24 months of 61.18% and 59.26% for the DCPC and AGV groups (P>0.05). All the patients had a visual acuity of hand movement or worse preoperatively. Visual acuity decreased in 6 eyes (24%) in the DCPC group and 9 eyes (27%) in AGV group. Complications included anterior segment inflammation in 5 eyes (20%), neurotrophic keratitis in 2 eyes (8%), and hypotony in 3 eyes (15%) in the DCPC group and hyphema in 5 eyes (15%) and tube occlusion in 3 eyes (9%) in AGV group.There was no significant difference in the success rate between the DCPC and AGV implantation in neovascular glaucoma treatment. However, DCPC is less time consuming and easier method for lowering IOP in patients with neovascular glaucoma.Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation: dose-standardized therapy in end-stage glaucoma.Ciliary body ablation in end-stage glaucoma has been widely performed with cryotherapy and neodymium:yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) laser, both techniques frequently involving considerable pain and postoperative inflammation, with an unpredictable final intraocular pressure (IOP) and a significant risk of phthisis. Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation (cyclodiode laser) has recently been introduced in an attempt to avoid some of these problems.Thirty patients with uncontrolled IOP and advanced glaucoma were divided on clinical grounds into two groups and were treated with either a half or a full standardized dose of laser (40 x 1500 mW for 1500 ms) and monitored for IOP control, visual acuity, postoperative inflammation and phthisis. Success of IOP control was defined as IOP < 22 mmHg or a decrease in IOP of > 30%; preservation of visual acuity or control of pain in blind eyes was also assessed.A sustained lowering of IOP was achieved in 90% of patients, with a mean follow up of 10.4 months. For the full treatment cases (group A), mean (+/-SD) pre-operative and postoperative IOP was 49.4 +/- 11.2 and 25.8 +/- 17.7 mmHg, respectively (a 48% reduction); 55% of patients achieved IOP < 22 mmHg and 68% gained an IOP reduction of > 30%. For the half-treatment cases (group B). the mean pre-operative and postoperative IOP was 29.4 +/- 4.3 and 18.9 +/- 5.7 mmHg, respectively (a 36% reduction); 63% of patients achieved IOP < 22 mmHg and 50% gained an IOP reduction of > 30%. Neovascular glaucoma was present in 60% of patients; the full-treatment subgroup of these patients achieved a mean lowering of IOP of 58%. Of 22 sighted eyes, 11 (50%) recorded no change in vision; seven (32%) eyes lost and four (18%) eyes gained vision; pain control was achieved in six of eight blind eyes (75%). There was no significant postoperative inflammation, one case of hypotony and no suggestion to date of sympathetic ophthalmia.Diode laser cyclophotocoagulation appears to be simple, safe and is frequently successful in the control of IOP in end-stage glaucoma. Optimum dosage parameters remain to be determined.Advanced uncontrolled glaucoma. Nd:YAG cyclophotocoagulation or tube surgery.Forty-five patients with advanced uncontrolled glaucoma who had had noncontact neodymium:YAG (Nd:YAG) cyclophotocoagulation were matched and compared with 45 patients who underwent tube implantation surgery. The matching was based on selected criteria, including diagnosis, number of previous operations on the index eye, number of previous glaucoma operations, aphakia, vitrectomy, and age. The drop in intraocular pressure (IOP) was statistically significant in each of the 2 groups at 1, 4, 6, and 12 months of follow-up (P less than 0.001). The tube patients needed fewer antiglaucoma medications at 1 year (P less than 0.025) and more surgical intervention for IOP control, although this was not statistically significant (P greater than 0.1). Laser treatment was repeated in 49% of cases, and age younger than 40 years was identified as a risk factor for poor response to this mode of therapy. The effect on visual acuity and the expected complications also are discussed.