Chondrosarcoma of bone: an assessment of outcome.The data on 227 patients who had been managed for a chondrosarcoma at one institution were reviewed to determine the nature of the lesions, the predictors of outcome, and whether there were any ways to change the treatment approaches to improve the results.The patients were followed for a mean duration of six years (range, three to twenty-five years). The mean age of the patients was forty-seven years (range, nine to eighty-four years). The most prevalent sites of the tumors were the femur (seventy-eight), the pelvis (fifty-one), and the humerus (thirty-nine). The tumors were divided into two groups according to histological grade. Eighty-six tumors (sixteen atypical enchondromas and seventy grade-1 chondrosarcomas) that were locally destructive but were associated with a low likelihood of metastasis were considered to be low-grade. The remaining 141 lesions, which were locally destructive, potentially metastatic, and capable of causing death, were thought to be high-grade. One hundred and three of these 141 lesions were grade 2, and thirty-eight were grade 3 (eighteen of the thirty-eight were grade 3 only, and twenty were both grade 3 and dedifferentiated). Two hundred and twenty-four patients were managed with resection and a limb-sparing procedure; the remaining three patients had an amputation. Postoperative adjuvant radiation was used for fifty-six patients; chemotherapy, for thirty-five; and both radiation and chemotherapy, for nineteen. Flow cytometric patterns were analyzed for 105 patients.The patients who had a high-grade tumor were older than those who had a low-grade tumor (mean age [and standard deviation], 50+/-17.0 years compared with 40+/-15.9 years; p < 0.001). Pathological fracture, metastasis, local recurrence, and death were more prevalent in the group that had a high-grade lesion (p < 0.001). Predictors of metastasis and death in that group of patients included local recurrence, a pelvic location of the tumor, a tumor that was more than 100 cubic centimeters in size, a ploidic abnormality (aneuploidy coupled with a high mean DNA index), a histological grade of 3, and a dedifferentiated type of tumor (p < 0.001).Although the data are suggestive, with the numbers available for study we could not detect a significant difference in the rates of pulmonary metastasis and death between the patients who had a grade-3 lesion and those who had a grade-3 lesion that was also dedifferentiated. However, the interval between diagnosis and death was 32+/-22.8 months for the patients who had a grade-3 lesion compared with 5+/-3.7 months for those who had a grade-3 lesion that was also dedifferentiated (p < 0.001). Overall, patients who had had a resection with wide margins (margins extending outside the reactive zone) had a longer duration of survival than did those who had had a so-called marginal resection (margins extending outside the tumor but within the reactive zone) or an intralesional resection (margins within the lesion) (p < 0.04). Adjunctive chemotherapy or radiation, or both (which, it must be noted, was used, without a protocol, in a relatively small number of patients), after an intralesional resection, for recurrent disease, or for distant metastasis did not appear to alter the outcome.Intralesional curettage and cementation for low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones: retrospective study and literature review.Various treatment strategies for low-grade chondrosarcomas with variable outcomes have been reported in the literature. The aim of this study was to assess the oncological and functional outcomes associated with intralesional curettage followed by adjuvant therapy comprising high-speed burring, thermal cauterization, and bone cementation with polymethylmethacrylate.We performed a retrospective review of 21 consecutive patients with intramedullary low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones treated by intralesional curettage and adjuvant therapy comprising high-speed burring, thermal cauterization, and cementation at our institution from 2007 to 2012.The average age of the patients was 48.7 (range, 18-71) years. There were 7 male and 14 female patients. The mean follow-up period was 58.4 (range, 26-85) months after surgery. The treated lesions were located in the proximal humerus (n=10), proximal tibia (n=6), and distal femur (n=5). At the average follow-up time point of 58.4 (range, 26-85) months, no patient had developed local recurrence and no distant metastases were observed. The average Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score among all 21 patients was 95% (84-100).The combination of intralesional curettage, application of high-speed burring, thermal cauterization, and cementation is an effective treatment strategy for low-grade intramedullary chondrosarcoma of long bones. Excellent oncological and functional results can be obtained.Low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones treated with intralesional curettage followed by application of phenol, ethanol, and bone-grafting.A common treatment of low-grade cartilaginous lesions of bone is intralesional curettage with local adjuvant therapy. Because of the wide variety of different diagnoses and treatments, there is still a lack of knowledge about the effectiveness of the use of phenol as local adjuvant therapy in patients with grade-I central chondrosarcoma of a long bone.A retrospective study was done to assess the clinical and oncological outcomes after intralesional curettage, application of phenol and ethanol, and bone-grafting in eighty-five patients treated between 1994 and 2005. Inclusion criteria were histologically proven grade-I central chondrosarcoma and location of the lesion in a long bone. The average age at surgery was 47.5 years (range, 15.6 to 72.3 years). The average duration of follow-up was 6.8 years (range, 0.2 to 14.1 years). Patients were evaluated periodically with conventional radiographs and gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (Gd-MRI) scans. When a lesion was suspected on the basis of the MRI, the patient underwent repeat intervention. Depending on the size of the recurrent lesion, biopsy followed by radiofrequency ablation (for lesions of <10 mm) or repeat curettage (for those of ≥10 mm) was performed.Of the eighty-five patients, eleven underwent repeat surgery because a lesion was suspected on the basis of the Gd-MRI studies during follow-up. Of these eleven, five had a histologically proven local recurrence (a recurrence rate of 5.9% [95% confidence interval, 0.9% to 10.9%]), and all were grade-I chondrosarcomas. General complications consisted of one superficial infection, and two femoral fractures within six weeks after surgery.This retrospective case series without controls has limitations, but the use of phenol as an adjuvant after intralesional curettage of low-grade chondrosarcoma of a long bone was safe and effective, with a recurrence rate of <6% at a mean of 6.8 years after treatment.Outcome of intralesional curettage for low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones.Different treatment strategies for low-grade chondrosarcomas are reported in the literature with variable outcomes. The aim of this study was to assess the oncological and functional outcomes associated with intralesional curettage and cementation of the lesion as a treatment strategy.We performed a retrospective review of 39 consecutive patients with intramedullary low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones treated by intralesional curettage and cementation at our institution between 1999 and 2005.There were 10 males and 29 females with a mean age of 55.5 years (32-82), and a mean follow-up of 5.1 years (3-8.7). Local recurrence occurred in two patients (5%) within the first two years following index surgery. Both were treated by re-curettage and cementation of the resultant defects. A second local recurrence developed a year later in one of these two patients, for which a further curettage followed by local liquid nitrogen treatment was performed. Overall, there were no cases of post-operative complications or metastases. The patients were assessed using the Musculoskeletal Tumour Society scoring system (MSTS) to determine limb function. The average score achieved was 94% (79-100%).Intralesional curettage is an effective treatment strategy for low-grade intramedullary chondrosarcoma of long bones, with excellent oncological and functional results. Careful case selection with stringent clinical and radiographic follow-up is recommended.Low risk of recurrence of enchondroma and low-grade chondrosarcoma in extremities. 80 patients followed for 2-25 years.We analyzed the clinical course in 40 patients with enchondroma and 40 with low-grade chondrosarcoma of the extremities after a median follow-up of 7 years. 13 patients with enchondroma and 2 with chondrosarcoma had only open biopsy and they had no signs of further progression of the lesions. Among 23 patients with enchondroma and 23 with chondrosarcoma who were treated by intralesional curettage, 3 had local recurrences. The 10-year local recurrence rate was 0.04 in the enchondroma group and 0.09 in the chondrosarcoma group. There were no metastases. The results imply that enchondroma and low-grade chondrosarcoma of the extremities should be treated with limited surgery. The morbidity associated with en bloc resection and reconstruction can apparently be obviated without jeopardizing the limb or survival.No recurrences in selected patients after curettage with cryotherapy for grade I chondrosarcomas.The low aggressiveness of Grade I chondrosarcomas is compatible with conservative surgical treatment.We asked whether combined curettage and cryotherapy would yield low rates of recurrence and whether supplemental internal fixation would retain function with low rates of complications in patients with Grade I central chondrosarcomas of the proximal humerus or distal femur.We retrospectively reviewed 15 patients: nine women and six men with a mean age of 45 years (range, 26-70 years). All patients underwent curettage and cryosurgery through a cortical window; we replaced the window and plated the region with at least three screws beyond the curetted area. None of the patients was lost to followup, and 14 patients (93%) were reexamined by us after a minimum of 5 years (mean, 8 years; range, 5-11 years).There were no perioperative anesthetic, neurologic, hardware, or healing complications. None of the patients had local recurrence or metastases develop. At last followup, the Musculoskeletal Tumor Society score was 27.9 (range, 22-30) and all patients had resumed their previous activities. No complications were associated with this simplified cryotherapy technique.The data confirm the appropriateness of conservative surgery for central low-grade chondrosarcomas of the proximal humerus and distal femur based on a combination of intralesional curettage and cryogenic parietal sterilization. Candidates for this approach should be chosen on the basis of the affected bone site, local extension staging, and clinicopathologic grading. We recommend supplementary internal fixation.Level IV, therapeutic study. See Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.Risk factors for local recurrence from atypical cartilaginous tumour and enchondroma of the long bones.The purpose of our study is to verify possible clinical and radiological findings with regard to distinguishing enchondroma from atypical cartilaginous tumour (ACT). In addition, this study determined risk factors that are associated with local recurrence of enchondroma or ACT treated with curettage.We retrospectively reviewed the records of 54 patients with enchondroma and 35 patients with ACT of the long bones treated by curettage between 1986 and 2015. The minimum follow-up was 18 months. The relationship between clinical and radiological factors and the tumour type or local recurrence was assessed using Chi-square test or Fischer exact test.Endosteal scalloping (p = 0.004) and soft tissue extension (p = 0.017) were shown to statistically favour ACT over enchondroma; by contrast, pain (p = 0.034) was more frequent in enchondroma compared to ACT. All patients with enchondroma had no local recurrence; in contrast, local recurrence occurred in four patients with ACT (11%). Soft tissue extension (p = 0.049) and the diagnosis of ACT (p = 0.021) were associated with an increased risk of local recurrence. We had a disease progression in three of four patients with local recurrence, and these had higher histological grade than the original tumour.Our data show that endosteal scalloping and soft tissue extension could be helpful in the differential diagnosis between enchondroma and ACT. We suggest following only those patients with ACT after surgery to identify any possible recurrence and, in case of recurrence, treat these patients with resection for the risk of disease progression.Curettage with pasteurization in situ for grade 1 chondrosarcoma - long-term follow up study of less invasive surgical procedure.In the treatment of grade 1 chondrosarcoma of long tubular bones, a wide excision with replacement by a metal prosthesis has been widely used. However, postoperative function of the affected extremity has occasionally been problematic.In two cases of grade 1 chondrosarcoma, a 54-year-old man with a lesion in the mid humerus and a 17-year-old woman with the lesion in the proximal femur, we performed curettage with pasteurization in situ. In both cases, destruction of the cortical bone was limited on radiographs. Follow-up studies 11 years after surgery did not showed local recurrence or functional deficit in either case.This less invasive surgical procedure has an advantage of sparing limb function and preventing local recurrence for grade 1 chondrosarcoma.Influence of intralesional surgery on treatment outcome of chondrosarcoma.Intralesional (IL) surgery for chondrosarcoma is an inadequate procedure; however, sometimes it cannot be avoided. The outcome of 26 patients (PTS) who underwent IL surgery for chondrosarcoma was analyzed.Median follow-up time was 146.5 months. Eighteen tumors were located in the axial skeleton and 8 in the extremities. The histologic grade distribution of the chondrosarcoma was: 14 Grade 1, 8 Grade 2, and 4 Grade 3. Diagnostic problems were noted in 4 of the 18 central tumors and 7 of 8 extremity tumors.The 20-year relapse free survival rate for the 26 PTS who underwent IL surgery was 7% and was 64% for 38 PTS who underwent wide or marginal surgery (P = 0.03144). Conversely, the 20-year overall survival rate for the 26 PTS after IL surgery was 68% and was 66% for 38 PTS who underwent wide or marginal surgery (P = 0.03144). Conversely, the 20-year overall survival rate for the 26 PTS after IL (P = 0.2266). The overall survival rates for the PTS with tumors of histologic Grade 1 and 2 or 3 tumor was 85% and 44%, respectively (P = 0.02817). The overall survival rates for PTS with central tumors and extremital tumors were 57% and 87%, respectively (P = 0.0968).IL surgery for chondrosarcoma often leads to local relapse. However, local relapse does not always result in metastases and death. The prognosis for PTS after IL surgery tends to differ according to tumor grade. After local relapse further limb salvage becomes difficult and many complications may occur.Low-grade chondrosarcoma of bone: experiences from the Vienna Bone and Soft Tissue Tumour Registry.In a retrospective single-centre study, 70 low-grade chondrosarcoma (LCS) (31 female/39 male patients with a mean age of 40 years) were reviewed to evaluate surgical management. The mean overall follow-up was 81 months (median: 73 months, range: 6-317 months). Seventeen lesions (24.3%) in the trunk and 53 (75.7%) in the extremities were treated by curettage (48.6%) or resection (51.5%). Local recurrence occurred in eight patients (11.4%) 18 months postoperatively (median: 18 months, range: 0-41 months). Recurrence-free survival was significantly better for patients with extremity lesions compared to truncal lesions, but was not affected by resection margin. The anatomical site "trunk" and an "intralesional" resection margin had a significant independent prognostic influence in multivariate analysis. Curettage with local adjuvants is a viable treatment option for most extremity LCS. In truncal LCS wide resection is recommended despite a potentially higher complication rate.Outcomes of curettage and anhydrous alcohol adjuvant for low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bone.Low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones can be treated successfully with extended intralesional curettage using adjuvants. However, there is no study reporting the use of anhydrous alcohol as an adjuvant in the treatment of low-grade chondrosarcoma. We asked (1) whether intralesional curettage and anhydrous alcohol adjuvant for low-grade chondrosarcoma is associated with good oncologic outcomes; and we report (2) the complications of the procedure.Thirty-six patients (13 men, 23 women) with a mean age of 46 years (range, 18-67 years) were treated for low-grade chondrosarcoma and followed up for a median of 62 months (range, 24-169 months). After intralesional curettage, and additional burring, anhydrous alcohol was used as an adjuvant therapy.At the time of last follow-up, there were no local recurrences or distant metastases. Six patients developed complications: 4 postoperative fractures (11%), 1 intra-articular loose body (3%) and 1 postoperative joint stiffness (3%).Anhydrous alcohol is a reasonable adjuvant for the curettage of low-grade chondrosarcoma of long bones. A long-term follow-up study is necessary, considering the slow biological progression of low-grade chondrosarcoma.Surgical treatment of central grade 1 chondrosarcoma of the appendicular skeleton.Diagnosis and treatment of low-grade chondrosarcoma remain controversial. We performed a review of a single-center series with the aims of assessing the oncologic outcome of these patients, verifying if intralesional curettage can be adequate treatment, and defining clinical criteria to support the surgeon and the oncologist in decision-making for surgery and subsequent follow-up.A retrospective review of 85 patients was performed (61 females and 24 males, age range 20-76 years). The site of the lesion was the femur in 35 cases, humerus in 33, tibia in 15, and fibula in 2. Sixty-four patients were treated by intralesional curettage. Twenty-one patients with aggressive radiological patterns were treated with wide resection.Mean follow-up was 67 months (range 24-206 months). Two patients developed local recurrence, both after intralesional curettage. The difference in incidence of recurrence was not statistically significant between the two groups. No distant metastases were observed. Postsurgical complications were significantly higher in the resection group.Low-grade chondrosarcoma of the appendicular skeleton without aggressive radiological patterns can be treated with intralesional surgery with good oncological outcome and very low rate of postsurgical complications. Wide resection, following surgical principles of malignant bone tumors, should be considered only when aggressive biologic behavior is evident on imaging.Surgical management of grade I chondrosarcoma of the long bones.The aim of this study was to compare the rates of local recurrence according to surgical treatment options in low-grade chondrosarcomas of the long bones. A retrospective review was made of 30 consecutive patients (12 male, 18 female) with a mean age of 40.7 years (range: 16-69 years) with intramedullary low-grade chondrosarcoma of the long bones treated either by intralesional curettage or wide resection at our institution between 1995 and 2011. The mean overall follow-up was 74 months (range : 24-186 months). There was no difference in local recurrence rates between patients treated with intralesional resection or wide resection (p = 0.98). Intralesional curettage seems to be feasible in selected cases to reduce the patient's postoperative morbidity in Grade I chondrosarcoma cases.Local Treatment with Adjuvant Therapy for Central Atypical Cartilaginous Tumors in the Long Bones: Analysis of Outcome and Complications in One Hundred and Eight Patients with a Minimum Follow-up of Two Years.A central atypical cartilaginous tumor (ACT)--formerly known as chondrosarcoma grade 1 (CS1)--is a tumor of intermediate-type malignancy, often treated with surgery. The extent of surgery remains controversial, as some advocate resection and others favor local treatment by curettage. Because of the low prevalence of ACT/CS1, the available data are limited and generally not uniform. The purpose of this study was to present the outcome for a large cohort of patients with ACT/CS1 in the long bones who were treated with curettage and adjuvant phenolization and followed for a minimum of two years according to national guidelines.A retrospective study was designed to analyze data from 108 patients treated for central ACT/CS1 in the long bones between 2006 and 2012. All patients were treated with curettage and adjuvant phenolization, and defects were filled with polymethylmethacrylate, bone graft, or bone substitutes. The primary end point was local recurrence or residual tumor. Secondary end points included the type and rate of complications and reoperations.All patients were free from local recurrence at a mean follow-up of 48.7 months (range, 24.3 to 97.5 months). Residual tumor was suspected in five patients, leading to a 95.4% disease-free survival rate. A fracture occurred in eleven patients (10.2%). Other complications were osseous penetration during the surgery (two patients), wound infection (one patient), arthrofibrosis (one patient), and skin necrosis (one patient). Tumor volume was related neither to the risk of fracture nor to the occurrence of residual tumor.In our experience, curettage of ACT/CS1 in the long bones with adjuvant phenolization is safe, even with large tumors of up to 100 cm(3). Most worrisome is the risk of fracture, which occurred in 10.2% of our patients. Considering the relatively mild behavior of ACT/CS1, less aggressive treatment, by observation or by minimally invasive surgery, could be the next step that should be evaluated prospectively.Oncological and functional results of cryosurgical therapy of enchondromas and chondrosarcomas grade 1.Cryosurgery using liquid nitrogen is used as adjuvant treatment after intralesional resection of bone tumours to induce cell death. It is applied to enlarge the oncological margins of resection and to reduce the local recurrence rate. The objective of this study is to analyze the oncological and functional results.We studied the oncological and functional results of curettage and cryosurgery in 123 patients with 130 tumors. There were 75 enchondromas and 55 chondrosarcomas grade 1. The minimal follow-up period for all patients was 2 years (range 24-119 months).During follow-up one local recurrence of an active enchondroma and one local recurrence of an aggressive enchondroma occurred. They were treated with curettage and cryosurgery again. Both patients were disease-free at minimum of 3 years follow-up. No local recurrences after treatment of chondrosarcoma grade 1 were seen. Functional scores, according to the MSTS scoring system, showed an average score of 28 points (94%) at 2 years follow-up. Post-operative fractures were seen in 18 patients (14%).Curettage and cryosurgery for enchondroma and chondrosarcoma grade 1 has excellent oncological and functional results. The post-operative management has been adjusted to reduce the number of fractures.Intralesional curettage, with phenol and cement as adjuvants, for low-grade intramedullary chondrosarcoma of the long bones.The authors conducted a retrospective study on 23 patients (12 females and 11 males) with low-grade intramedullary chondrosarcoma of a long bone, treated with intralesional curettage, phenolization and cementation. The use of phenol was supported by an in vitro study, the use of bone cement by clinical studies. A consensus has been growing that this type of tumours should be treated less aggressively. The average age of the patients was 445 years (range: 29 to 71). The mean follow-up period was 6.2 years (range: 2.5 to 11 years). After 6 months the average Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) score was 76.8% of 30, the best possible score (range: 61% to 87%). After 12 months this score increased to 89.8% (range: 63% to 100%). Complications were: one recurrence (43%), treated with a tumour prosthesis, and 3 fractures (13%). The authors strongly support this new technique, all the more as it still allows for a more radical approach, if necessary. They stress the importance of a strict follow-up by a multidisciplinary team, in order to treat local recurrences and (rarely) metastases.Curettage and cryosurgery for low-grade cartilage tumors is associated with low recurrence and high function.Chondrosarcomas of bone traditionally have been treated by wide or radical excision, procedures that may result in considerable lifelong disability. Grade 1 chondrosarcomas have little or no metastatic potential and are often difficult to distinguish from painful benign enchondromas. Curettage with adjuvant cryosurgery has been proposed as an alternative therapy for Grade 1 chondrosarcomas given the generally better function after the procedure. However, because it is an intralesional procedure, curettage and cryosurgery may be associated with higher rates of recurrence.We asked whether Grade 1 chondrosarcomas and enchondromas of uncertain malignant potential treated by curettage and cryosurgery are associated with low recurrence rates and high functional scores.We retrospectively reviewed the records of 46 patients with Grade 1 chondrosarcomas and enchondromas of uncertain malignant potential treated by curettage and cryosurgery. Forty-one patients had tumors of the long bones. Patients were followed a minimum of 18 months (average, 47.2. months; range, 18-134 months) for evidence of recurrence and for assessment of Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) functional score.Two of the 46 patients had recurrences in the original tumor site (4.3% recurrence rate), which subsequently were removed by wide excision, and both patients were confirmed to be disease-free 36 and 30 months, respectively, after the second surgery. The mean MSTS score was 27.2 of 30 points (median, 29 points).Our observations show curettage with cryosurgery is associated with low recurrence of Grade 1 chondrosarcoma and high functional scores. Curettage with cryosurgery is a reasonable alternative to wide or radical excision as the treatment for Grade 1 chondrosarcomas, and allows for more radical surgery in the event of local recurrence.Level IV, therapeutic study. See the Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.Treatment of benign and low-grade malignant intramedullary chondroid tumours with curettage and cryosurgery.To shed light on the controversy surrounding the methods of evaluating, staging and final treatment of intramedullary chondroid lesions. Controversy particularly exists for enchondroma and low-grade chondrosarcoma located in the extremities, because their accurate distinction is hampered by their radiographical and histological similarity.Since 1991 we have treated 22 patients (mean age: 39.6 years) with 26 lesions (three chondroblastomas, 14 enchondromas and nine grade 1 chondrosarcomas) with curettage, cryosurgery and bone grafting.After a mean follow-up of 26 months no recurrences were observed. Complications consisted of two post-operative fractures, one wound infection and one intraoperative venous gas embolism. All bone grafts incorporated, resulting in full weight-bearing capacity and excellent functional results.The usefulness of a combination of curettage and cryosurgery as adjuvant therapy is considered to be equal to marginal resection according to orthopaedic oncological principles. The pre-operative assessment of these lesions and cryosurgical technique is described in detail.Surgical treatment of grade I central chondrosarcoma.The grade of chondrosarcoma relates to the likelihood of local recurrence and metastases. Many Grade I chondrosarcomas behave benignly if aggressively, and the question arises regarding whether wide resection is essential to control the disease. We therefore asked whether intralesional surgery also could be extended to Grade I chondrosarcomas without an increase in recurrence. We retrospectively reviewed 31 patients with Grade I chondrosarcomas of the limbs. The minimum followup was 66 months (mean, 157 months; range, 66-296 months). None of the 16 patients treated by resection had recurrences during the followup and two of the 15 patients with intralesional excision had recurrences, both of which resolved with resection of the site involved by the recurrence without progression of the disease. The Musculoskeletal Tumor Society scores averaged 72% in patients treated with wide resection compared with 89% in the 15 patients treated by intralesional surgery. The two recurrences occurred in patients whose radiographs showed thinning of the cortex combined with bone enlargement and marked endosteal scalloping; histologic examination in these two patients also showed a correlation between radiographic aggressiveness and the presence of myxoid areas and hypercellularity.Level II, prognostic study. See Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.Surgical management of conventional grade I chondrosarcoma of long bones.We retrospectively reviewed 70 patients with low-grade (Grade I) chondrosarcoma of the appendicular skeleton treated at the Mayo Clinic from 1980 to 2001. Fifty-four patients underwent wide resections and three patients underwent marginal excision for radiographically aggressive lesions. Thirteen patients were treated with intralesional curettage for more indolent lesions. The mean age of the patients was 43 years (range, 5-85 years) and the minimum followup was 0.2 year (mean, 8.5 years; range, 0.2-22.8 years). Of the patients who had wide resection, one experienced local recurrence and one had metastasis develop. One patient in the group treated with intralesional curettage had local recurrence and metastasis. We observed no difference in overall survival rate between the intralesional curettage group and the wide resection group. Although there was no difference in the treatment outcome between the two groups, patients with more radiographically aggressive lesions underwent more extensive surgery. The data suggest in selected patients less radiographically aggressive Grade I chondrosarcoma can be safely treated with intralesional curettage without compromising patient outcome.Outcomes after extensive manual curettage and limited burring for atypical cartilaginous tumour of long bone.Adjuvant treatment after intralesional curettage for atypical cartilaginous tumours (ACTs) of long bones is widely accepted for extending surgical margins. However, evaluating the isolated effect of adjuvant treatment is difficult, and it is unclear whether not using such adjuvants provides poor oncological outcomes. Hence, we analyzed whether intralesional curettage without cryosurgery or chemical adjuvants provides poor oncological outcomes in patients with an ACT.A total of 24 patients (nine men, 15 women) (mean age 45 years; 18 to 62) were treated for ACTs of long bones and followed up for a median of 66 months (interquartile range 50 to 84). All patients were treated with extensive manual curettage and limited burring. Bone cement and grafts were used to fill bone defects in 16 and eight patients, respectively. No chemical adjuvants or cryosurgery were used.No local recurrence was detectable on plain radiographs and MRI or CT images. At the last follow-up, there were no distant metastases or disease-specific deaths. No procedure-related complications or postoperative fractures developed.Intralesional curettage without cryosurgery or chemical adjuvants may provide excellent oncological outcomes for patients with ACTs of long bones, without the risk of complications related to adjuvant use. Our investigation suggests thorough curettage alone is a reasonable treatment option for ACT. However, we acknowledge the limited size of our investigation warrants a multicentre collaborative study to confirm our findings. Cite this article: Influence of cryosurgery on treatment outcome of low-grade chondrosarcoma.Successfully managing low-grade chondrosarcomas with margins considered less than wide would minimize the need for extensive reconstruction. We report our experience using cryotherapy as an adjuvant to treat patients with low-grade intracompartmental chondrosarcomas. Ten consecutive patients had intralesional resections including curettage, cryo-surgery, and polymethylmethacrylate application. Eight of these patients required prophylactic skeletal stabilization. We retrospectively reviewed the outcomes for tumor recurrence, disease progression, and complications. The Musculo-skeletal Tumor Society rating scale was used to evaluate functional outcome, and the mean score was 27 points (range, 25-30 points). The mean age of the patients was 54.4 years (range, 29-83 years), and the average followup was 38.5 months (range, 24-60 months). Patients were treated for lesions of the femur (n = 3), humerus (n = 3), scapula (n = 2), tibia (n = 1), and acetabulum (n = 1). There was no evidence of recurrence or metastases. At the latest followup, all patients were well, however, one patient had hardware loosening. In this small group of patients, intralesional resection with adjuvant cryoablation provided an alternative to more radical procedures for low-grade intracompartmental chondrosarcoma.Chondrosarcoma of bone: does the size of the tumor, the presence of a pathologic fracture, or prior intervention have an impact on local control and survival?We studied 45 patients with chondrosarcoma, without metastasis at diagnosis, who were surgically treated between January 2000 and December 2004 to evaluate the risk factors associated with local recurrence and metastasis.Fourteen (31%) patients had had some major prior intervention, either in the form of an open biopsy or a curettage / unplanned excision, before presenting to us. Eight patients had pathologic fractures at presentation. None of the patients received adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The follow-up duration ranged from 8-75 months. All survivors had a minimum follow-up of 36 months (range 36-75 months).There were 11 grade 1 (24.5%), 23 grade 2 (51%), and 11 grade 3 (24.5%) chondrosarcomas. Thirty-two (71%) patients had tumors that were larger than 8 cm in the greatest dimension. Margins were adequate in 31 patients. Twenty-five patients had disease relapse; there were four local failures, nine distant failures, and 12 combined failures. At the time of the last review, 12 patients had died, 11 were alive with disease, and 22 were free of disease. The cumulative event-free survival was 44% and the overall survival was 73%.Grade of tumor, size of tumor, and adequacy of resection might be important predictors of outcome. Local recurrence is a prelude to distant metastasis and portends poor ultimate survival. The presence of a pathological fracture could indicate biologically aggressive disease, and limb salvage in these cases should be advised with caution. Even in cases where there has been a prior unplanned intervention, local control can be achieved by subsequent adequate resection.Extended intralesional treatment versus resection of low-grade chondrosarcomas.The need for segmental resection versus intralesional treatment of low-grade chondrosarcomas of the appendicular skeleton remains controversial. We hypothesized extended intralesional treatment would equally control malignant disease but with improved functional outcomes and decreased postoperative complications. We retrospectively reviewed 31 patients with 32 Grade I intracompartmental chondrosarcomas of the long bones of the appendicular skeleton treated with either resection (15 lesions) or extended intralesional curetting (17) at a minimum followup of 2 years (median, 55 months; range, 24-203 months). Lesions were larger and median followup was longer in the resection cohort. One local recurrence developed in each treatment cohort and neither transitioned to a higher grade of tumor. No patient had metastases develop or died of disease. The mean final Musculoskeletal Tumor Society functional scores were greater after extended intralesional versus resection treatment (29.5 versus 25.1). Complications were observed more frequently after resection and reconstruction (seven of 15) as compared with extended intralesional treatment (one of 17). Extended intralesional treatment of Grade I intracompartmental chondrosarcomas of the long bones of the appendicular skeleton therefore appears safe with improved functional scores and decreased complications versus segmental resection and reconstruction.Level III, therapeutic study. See the Guidelines for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.Intralesional curettage of central low-grade chondrosarcoma: A midterm follow-up study.The aim of this study was to review the experience of surgical treatment of low-grade chondrosarcoma and to assess the long-term oncological and functional outcomes between intralesional curettage and wide excision.We included 11 patients with central low-grade chondrosarcoma lesions treated with intralesional curettage or wide excision from 1998 to 2013. Seven patients were treated with intralesional curettage and local adjuvant treatment (Group A), and four patients were treated with wide excision and reconstructive surgery (Group B). The mean age of patients was 43.8±17.6 years (range, 20-71 years), and the mean duration of follow-up was 84.4±47.6 months (range, 48-194 months).Group A had a significantly lower complication rate than Group B; three complications were documented in Group B (0% vs. 75%, p=0.024). The operative time (177.1 hours vs. 366.3 hours, p=0.010) and the hospital stay (6.6 days vs. 12.5 days, p=0.010) were significantly shorter in Group A. There was one local recurrence in Group A without statistical significance. Also, there were no differences between intralesional curettage and wide excision with respect to the blood loss. No metastasis disease occurred in either group during the follow-up period. The Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) scores in Groups A and B were 99.0±2.5 and 94.2±4.2, respectively, with statistically significant difference (p=0.048).Extended intralesional curettage has the benefits of good MSTS score, shorter operative time, shorter hospital stay, and lower complication rate without increasing local recurrence in central low-grade chondrosarcoma. For central low-grade chondrosarcoma, we suggest extended curettage to decrease soft tissue damage and surgical risk.Relationship between surgical procedure and outcome for patients with grade I chondrosarcomas.To evaluate the oncological outcome of patients with grade I chondrosarcomas according to the type of surgical treatment performed, since there is still controversy regarding the need for aggressive resections to reach a successful outcome.The records of 23 patients with grade I chondrosarcomas were reviewed. The mean age was 38.4 years, ranging from 11 to 70 years; 52% were men and 48% were women. The femur was the site of 13 tumors. The tumors were staged as IA (17, 74%) and IB (6, 26%). Regarding tumor location, 74% (17) were medullary, 22% (5) were peripheral, and 4% (1) was indeterminate. Tumor size ranged from 2 to 25 cm, mean 7.9 cm. Regarding the surgical procedure, 11 patients underwent intralesional resection, 9 patients underwent wide resection, and 3 underwent radical resection. The follow-up period ranged from 24 to 192 months.None of the patients developed local recurrence or metastases; 7 patients had other general complications.This data supports the use of less aggressive procedures for treatment of low-grade chondrosarcomas.