Vein surgery with or without skin grafting versus conservative treatment for leg ulcers. A randomized prospective study.In order for us to evaluate the efficiency of perforator vein surgery and skin grafting in leg ulcer patients, 47 patients were randomized into 3 treatment groups (group A: surgery for incompetent perforators, group B: surgery for incompetent perforators and ulcer excision followed by grafting, group C: control group). All the patients were treated with a compression bandage. When cellulitis was observed, a systemic antibiotic was given; eczema was treated with a steroid ointment. Fourty patients were evaluated regularly during one year after entry. There were no differences between the 3 treatment groups considering base-line characteristics, median ulcer size at entry and after one year. According to a review of the initial phlebograms, the occurrence of post-thrombotic changes in the deep veins were recorded in the majority of the legs. Our results suggest that ligation of incompetent perforators and skin grafting, as used in the present study, may not offer an additional advantage for venous ulcer patients with insufficiency of the deep veins when compared to conservative treatment. However, the removal of insufficient superficial veins was not studied.Conservative versus surgical treatment of venous leg ulcers: a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial.The prevalence of venous leg ulcers is as high as 1% to 1.5%, and the total costs of this disease are 1% of the total annual health care budget in Western European countries. Treatment modalities are conservative or surgical. Subfascial endoscopic perforating vein surgery (SEPS) combined with superficial vein ligation is performed in many centers to address vein incompetence in patients with chronic venous leg ulcers. Several reports describe good healing and low recurrence rates, although a randomized trial to compare surgical treatment including SEPS and treatment of the superficial venous system to conservative modalities has never been performed. Therefore, a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial was conducted to study whether ambulatory compression therapy with venous surgery is a better treatment than just ambulatory compression therapy in venous leg ulcer patients.Patients with an active (open) venous leg ulcer (CEAP C6) qualified for the study. The study consisted of two treatment groups. All patients were treated by standardized ambulatory compression therapy, and half of the patients received SEPS. Concomitant superficial venous incompetence was also treated in the second group. For allocation to both treatment groups, each patient was assigned by a computer program at the randomization center. The primary goal of the study was to compare the ulcer-free period during follow-up in both study groups. Secondary end points were ulcer healing and recurrence rates.From April 1997 until January 2001, 200 ulcerated legs (170 patients) were included in the study in 12 centers in The Netherlands. A total of 97 ulcers were allocated to the surgical group and 103 to the conservative group. Patient characteristics were similar in the two treatment groups at baseline, with the exception of a higher proportion in the conservative group of diabetes mellitus. Healing rates were 83% in the surgical group and 73% in the conservative group (not significant; median time to healing, 27 months). Recurrence rates were the same in both treatment groups (22% surgical vs 23% conservative). During follow-up of a mean of 29 months (median, 27 months) in the surgical group and 26 months (median, 24 months) in the conservative group, we found that in the surgical group, the ulcer-free rate was 72%, whereas in the conservative group this rate was 53% (P = .11; Mann-Whitney test). Patients with recurrent ulceration or medially located ulcers in the surgical group had a longer ulcer-free period than those treated in the conservative group (P = .02 for both). A first-time ulcer and one of the centers also had a positive effect on the ulcer-free period during follow-up (P < .001 and P = .02), independent of the treatment group. Deep vein incompetence did not affect the ulcer-free period.In conclusion, we suggest that patients with medial and/or recurrent ulceration should receive surgery combined with ambulatory compression therapy. A dedicated center should provide care for those patients.Subfascial endoscopic perforator vein surgery: indications and results.Subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS) is a new, minimally invasive technique performed in patients with advanced chronic venous insufficiency. The objective of the operation is to interrupt incompetent medial calf perforating veins to decrease venous reflux and reduce ambulatory venous hypertension in critical areas above the ankle where venous ulcers most frequently develop. Patients with stasis skin changes and healed or active venous ulcerations are potential candidates for the operation. Preoperative evaluation is performed with duplex scanning of the superficial, deep and perforator system, to diagnose both obstruction and valvular incompetence. Results of the North American SEPS Registry (NASEPS) as well as experience in several individual centers confirmed that the operation has significantly fewer wound complications than the classic open surgical techniques, and that rapid ulcer healing can be achieved. At the Mayo Clinic an ulcer recurrence rate of 12% was observed, with recurrence significantly more frequent in post-thrombotic limbs than in patients with primary venous valvular incompetence. The NASEPS Registry report confirmed a 2-year cumulative ulcer recurrence rate of 28%; ulcer recurrence was significantly more frequent in post-thrombotic limbs, especially in those with deep venous obstruction. SEPS is a new, low-risk, outpatient procedure that effectively decreases perforator reflux in patients with venous ulcerations, and should be added to our armamentarium to treat patients with advanced chronic venous disease. Long-term prospective and randomized studies are, however, still required to provide level I evidence of late efficacy.Early and long-term results of physical methods in the treatment of venous leg ulcers: randomized controlled trial.To estimate early and long-term results of physical methods in the treatment of venous leg ulcers.In group A after surgical operation, 40 patients were treated with the high-voltage stimulation (HVS) (100 µs, 100 Hz, 100 V) and drug therapy. In group B after operation, 37 patients were treated with ultrasound (0.5 W/cm(2), 1 MHz) and drug therapy. In group C after operation, 33 patients were treated with low-level laser therapy (LLLT) (810 nm, 65 mW) and drug therapy. In group D after operation, 35 patients were treated with the compression stockings (25-31 mmHg) and drug therapy. In group E after operation, 37 patients were only treated with drug therapy. Group F consisted of 32 patients, conservatively treated with the HVS and drug therapy. Group G consisted of 20 patients, conservatively treated with ultrasound and drug therapy. Group H consisted of 21 patients, conservatively treated with LLLT and drug therapy. Group I consisted of 30 patients, conservatively treated with compression and drug therapy. Group J consisted of 27 patients only treated with drug therapy.Both short and long term parameters showed that compression therapy is the most efficient in ulcer healing. The electrical and ultrasound methods are less effective. The laser therapy ared useless.Superficial venous surgery in addition to compression therapy is the most efficient treatment of venous leg ulcers. The compression therapy should be continued both surgically and conservatively treated patients with healed ulcers. In special cases after superficial venous surgery (isolated superficial reflux) compression therapy could be applied only to the time of ulcer closure without continuing it longer. HVS and ultrasound therapy are useful methods in conservative treatment of venous leg ulcers. For surgically-treated patients these physical therapies are efficient only in superficial plus deep reflux cases. HVS and ultrasound can be alternative methods, but are less effective in recurrence risk. LLLT is not an efficient physical method in treatment of venous leg ulcers.Early results from a randomized trial of saphenous surgery with or without subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery in patients with a venous ulcer.The aim was to clarify the role of incompetent perforators (IPs) in venous leg ulcers. This short-term report focused on safety, patient satisfaction and the fate of IPs after subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS), or saphenous surgery alone.Patients aged 30-78 years with an open or recently healed venous ulcer, and with an incompetent saphenous vein and IPs, were allocated randomly to saphenous surgery alone, or in combination with SEPS. A control duplex scan was performed 6-9 months after surgery, and clinical follow-up was scheduled after 1 week, 3 and 12 months. A standard questionnaire was completed at each clinical visit.Seventy-five patients were enrolled; 37 had SEPS and 38 had saphenous surgery alone. SEPS prolonged the operation by a median of 15 min (P = 0.003). Duplex imaging revealed significantly more remaining IPs in the no-SEPS group (P < 0.001). Compared with the preoperative scan, significantly more legs were free from IPs in the SEPS group compared with the no-SEPS group (21 of 36 versus 7 of 37 respectively; P < 0.001). There were no other major outcome differences between the groups.There was no short-term clinical benefit from adding SEPS to saphenous surgery in patients with varicose ulcers and IPs, although SEPS reduced the number of perforators remaining after 1 year.Endoscopic versus open subfascial division of incompetent perforating veins in the treatment of venous leg ulceration: a randomized trial.Subfascial division of incompetent perforating veins plays an important role in the surgical treatment of patients with venous ulceration of the lower leg. To minimize the high incidence of postoperative wound complications after open exploration, endoscopic approaches have recently been developed. We carried out a prospective, randomized comparison of open and endoscopic treatment of these patients that was aimed at ulcer healing and postoperative wound complications.Patients with current venous ulceration on the medial side of the lower leg were randomly allocated to open exploration by the modified Linton approach or endoscopic exploration by use of a mediastinoscope.Thirty-nine patients were randomized, 19 to open exploration and 20 to endoscopic exploration. The incidence of wound infections after open exploration was 53%, compared with 0% in the endoscopic group (p < 0.001). Patients in the open group needed longer hospital stays (mean, 7 days; range, 3 to 39 days) than patients in the endoscopic group (mean, 4 days; range, 2 to 6 days; p = 0.001). Four months after operation, the ulcers of 17 patients (90%) in the open group and 17 patients (85%) in the endoscopic group had healed. During a mean follow-up of 21 months (range, 16 to 29 months), no recurrences were noticed in either group.Endoscopic division of incompetent perforating veins is equally as effective as open surgical exploration for the treatment of venous ulceration of the lower leg but leads to significantly fewer wound healing complications. Endoscopic division is therefore the preferred method.Endoscopic versus open subfascial division of incompetent perforating veins in the treatment of venous leg ulceration: a randomized trial.Subfascial division of incompetent perforating veins plays an important role in the surgical treatment of patients with venous ulceration of the lower leg. To minimize the high incidence of postoperative wound complications after open exploration, endoscopic approaches have recently been developed. We carried out a prospective, randomized comparison of open and endoscopic treatment of these patients that was aimed at ulcer healing and postoperative wound complications.Patients with current venous ulceration on the medial side of the lower leg were randomly allocated to open exploration by the modified Linton approach or endoscopic exploration by use of a mediastinoscope.Thirty-nine patients were randomized, 19 to open exploration and 20 to endoscopic exploration. The incidence of wound infections after open exploration was 53%, compared with 0% in the endoscopic group (p < 0.001). Patients in the open group needed longer hospital stays (mean, 7 days; range, 3 to 39 days) than patients in the endoscopic group (mean, 4 days; range, 2 to 6 days; p = 0.001). Four months after operation, the ulcers of 17 patients (90%) in the open group and 17 patients (85%) in the endoscopic group had healed. During a mean follow-up of 21 months (range, 16 to 29 months), no recurrences were noticed in either group.Endoscopic division of incompetent perforating veins is equally as effective as open surgical exploration for the treatment of venous ulceration of the lower leg but leads to significantly fewer wound healing complications. Endoscopic division is therefore the preferred method.Early results from a randomized trial of saphenous surgery with or without subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery in patients with a venous ulcer.The aim was to clarify the role of incompetent perforators (IPs) in venous leg ulcers. This short-term report focused on safety, patient satisfaction and the fate of IPs after subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS), or saphenous surgery alone.Patients aged 30-78 years with an open or recently healed venous ulcer, and with an incompetent saphenous vein and IPs, were allocated randomly to saphenous surgery alone, or in combination with SEPS. A control duplex scan was performed 6-9 months after surgery, and clinical follow-up was scheduled after 1 week, 3 and 12 months. A standard questionnaire was completed at each clinical visit.Seventy-five patients were enrolled; 37 had SEPS and 38 had saphenous surgery alone. SEPS prolonged the operation by a median of 15 min (P = 0.003). Duplex imaging revealed significantly more remaining IPs in the no-SEPS group (P < 0.001). Compared with the preoperative scan, significantly more legs were free from IPs in the SEPS group compared with the no-SEPS group (21 of 36 versus 7 of 37 respectively; P < 0.001). There were no other major outcome differences between the groups.There was no short-term clinical benefit from adding SEPS to saphenous surgery in patients with varicose ulcers and IPs, although SEPS reduced the number of perforators remaining after 1 year.Subfascial endoscopic perforator vein surgery: indications and results.Subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS) is a new, minimally invasive technique performed in patients with advanced chronic venous insufficiency. The objective of the operation is to interrupt incompetent medial calf perforating veins to decrease venous reflux and reduce ambulatory venous hypertension in critical areas above the ankle where venous ulcers most frequently develop. Patients with stasis skin changes and healed or active venous ulcerations are potential candidates for the operation. Preoperative evaluation is performed with duplex scanning of the superficial, deep and perforator system, to diagnose both obstruction and valvular incompetence. Results of the North American SEPS Registry (NASEPS) as well as experience in several individual centers confirmed that the operation has significantly fewer wound complications than the classic open surgical techniques, and that rapid ulcer healing can be achieved. At the Mayo Clinic an ulcer recurrence rate of 12% was observed, with recurrence significantly more frequent in post-thrombotic limbs than in patients with primary venous valvular incompetence. The NASEPS Registry report confirmed a 2-year cumulative ulcer recurrence rate of 28%; ulcer recurrence was significantly more frequent in post-thrombotic limbs, especially in those with deep venous obstruction. SEPS is a new, low-risk, outpatient procedure that effectively decreases perforator reflux in patients with venous ulcerations, and should be added to our armamentarium to treat patients with advanced chronic venous disease. Long-term prospective and randomized studies are, however, still required to provide level I evidence of late efficacy.Vein surgery with or without skin grafting versus conservative treatment for leg ulcers. A randomized prospective study.In order for us to evaluate the efficiency of perforator vein surgery and skin grafting in leg ulcer patients, 47 patients were randomized into 3 treatment groups (group A: surgery for incompetent perforators, group B: surgery for incompetent perforators and ulcer excision followed by grafting, group C: control group). All the patients were treated with a compression bandage. When cellulitis was observed, a systemic antibiotic was given; eczema was treated with a steroid ointment. Fourty patients were evaluated regularly during one year after entry. There were no differences between the 3 treatment groups considering base-line characteristics, median ulcer size at entry and after one year. According to a review of the initial phlebograms, the occurrence of post-thrombotic changes in the deep veins were recorded in the majority of the legs. Our results suggest that ligation of incompetent perforators and skin grafting, as used in the present study, may not offer an additional advantage for venous ulcer patients with insufficiency of the deep veins when compared to conservative treatment. However, the removal of insufficient superficial veins was not studied.Combined subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery and endovenous laser treatment without impact on the great saphenous vein for management of lower-extremity varicose veins.Conventional high ligation and stripping of the great saphenous vein (GSV) has a good curative effect but is highly traumatic with a considerable relapse rate. Subfascial endoscopic perforator surgery (SEPS) plus endovenous laser treatment (EVLT) could be applied as individual therapy. This study aimed to evaluate the feasibility of performing combined SEPS and EVLT without impacting GSV in the management of valvular insufficiency of the lower-limb venous perforators.Placement of lower-limb venous perforator insufficiency was marked by ascending phlebography in 83 affected limbs from September 2010 to June 2011. After randomization, SEPS was performed on 41 limbs to address the insufficiency of the venous perforators under the deep fascia, in combination with EVLT to close the superficial varicose veins without impacting the GSV. The remaining 42 limbs were treated using traditional GSV phlebectomy as controls.Postoperatively, all varicose veins were resolved, with lightening of the pigmentation and healing of the ulcer. Within a follow-up period of 5 - 11 months, no symptoms had recurred. Compared with the control group, the operation time, the number of incisions sutured, and the in-hospital time decreased on average by 1.5 hours, 4.7, and 6.8 days, respectively (P < 0.01 in all cases).Combined SEPS and EVLT for treatment of valvular insufficiency of the lower-limb venous perforators offer the advantages of microtrauma and rapid cure.Early and long-term results of physical methods in the treatment of venous leg ulcers: randomized controlled trial.To estimate early and long-term results of physical methods in the treatment of venous leg ulcers.In group A after surgical operation, 40 patients were treated with the high-voltage stimulation (HVS) (100 µs, 100 Hz, 100 V) and drug therapy. In group B after operation, 37 patients were treated with ultrasound (0.5 W/cm(2), 1 MHz) and drug therapy. In group C after operation, 33 patients were treated with low-level laser therapy (LLLT) (810 nm, 65 mW) and drug therapy. In group D after operation, 35 patients were treated with the compression stockings (25-31 mmHg) and drug therapy. In group E after operation, 37 patients were only treated with drug therapy. Group F consisted of 32 patients, conservatively treated with the HVS and drug therapy. Group G consisted of 20 patients, conservatively treated with ultrasound and drug therapy. Group H consisted of 21 patients, conservatively treated with LLLT and drug therapy. Group I consisted of 30 patients, conservatively treated with compression and drug therapy. Group J consisted of 27 patients only treated with drug therapy.Both short and long term parameters showed that compression therapy is the most efficient in ulcer healing. The electrical and ultrasound methods are less effective. The laser therapy ared useless.Superficial venous surgery in addition to compression therapy is the most efficient treatment of venous leg ulcers. The compression therapy should be continued both surgically and conservatively treated patients with healed ulcers. In special cases after superficial venous surgery (isolated superficial reflux) compression therapy could be applied only to the time of ulcer closure without continuing it longer. HVS and ultrasound therapy are useful methods in conservative treatment of venous leg ulcers. For surgically-treated patients these physical therapies are efficient only in superficial plus deep reflux cases. HVS and ultrasound can be alternative methods, but are less effective in recurrence risk. LLLT is not an efficient physical method in treatment of venous leg ulcers.Conservative versus surgical treatment of venous leg ulcers: a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial.The prevalence of venous leg ulcers is as high as 1% to 1.5%, and the total costs of this disease are 1% of the total annual health care budget in Western European countries. Treatment modalities are conservative or surgical. Subfascial endoscopic perforating vein surgery (SEPS) combined with superficial vein ligation is performed in many centers to address vein incompetence in patients with chronic venous leg ulcers. Several reports describe good healing and low recurrence rates, although a randomized trial to compare surgical treatment including SEPS and treatment of the superficial venous system to conservative modalities has never been performed. Therefore, a prospective, randomized, multicenter trial was conducted to study whether ambulatory compression therapy with venous surgery is a better treatment than just ambulatory compression therapy in venous leg ulcer patients.Patients with an active (open) venous leg ulcer (CEAP C6) qualified for the study. The study consisted of two treatment groups. All patients were treated by standardized ambulatory compression therapy, and half of the patients received SEPS. Concomitant superficial venous incompetence was also treated in the second group. For allocation to both treatment groups, each patient was assigned by a computer program at the randomization center. The primary goal of the study was to compare the ulcer-free period during follow-up in both study groups. Secondary end points were ulcer healing and recurrence rates.From April 1997 until January 2001, 200 ulcerated legs (170 patients) were included in the study in 12 centers in The Netherlands. A total of 97 ulcers were allocated to the surgical group and 103 to the conservative group. Patient characteristics were similar in the two treatment groups at baseline, with the exception of a higher proportion in the conservative group of diabetes mellitus. Healing rates were 83% in the surgical group and 73% in the conservative group (not significant; median time to healing, 27 months). Recurrence rates were the same in both treatment groups (22% surgical vs 23% conservative). During follow-up of a mean of 29 months (median, 27 months) in the surgical group and 26 months (median, 24 months) in the conservative group, we found that in the surgical group, the ulcer-free rate was 72%, whereas in the conservative group this rate was 53% (P = .11; Mann-Whitney test). Patients with recurrent ulceration or medially located ulcers in the surgical group had a longer ulcer-free period than those treated in the conservative group (P = .02 for both). A first-time ulcer and one of the centers also had a positive effect on the ulcer-free period during follow-up (P < .001 and P = .02), independent of the treatment group. Deep vein incompetence did not affect the ulcer-free period.In conclusion, we suggest that patients with medial and/or recurrent ulceration should receive surgery combined with ambulatory compression therapy. A dedicated center should provide care for those patients.