MRI of pregnant patients for suspected pulmonary embolism: steady-state free precession vs postgadolinium 3D-GRE.Pulmonary embolism is a leading cause of maternal mortality in the developed world. Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy and Computer tomography cause ionizing radiation exposure. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging is generally not indicated in pregnant patients. MRI using motion resistant techniques that do not use intravenous contrast material, such as balanced steady-state free precession may be a better approach in pregnant patients.To describe the preliminary findings of the use of SSFP for the evaluation of pregnant patients with suspected PE, and to compare with a young women population evaluated with postgadolinium 3D-gradient echo sequences for the same intention.Radiology database was searched for two groups of subjects who underwent chest MRI at 1.5T for suspected PE, between January, 2007 and June, 2010: pregnant patients with MRI including balanced SSFP (group A) and females younger than 45 years old including a T1-weighted postgadolinium 3D-GRE (group B) sequence. The final study population consisted of 21 subjects. Blind and independent evaluation of MR images was performed for image quality of the pulmonary arterial system, PE and other chest findings. Data was subject to statistical analysis.Good image quality was observed in all central and lobar arteries on both groups and in 90% (group A) and at least 83.3% (group B) of the segmental arteries. There was no significant difference between groups A and B for image quality of central and lobar pulmonary arteries (p > 0.05).SSFP can visualize central, lobar and segmental pulmonary arteries with sufficient image quality in pregnant patients, comparable to 3D-GRE.Pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: diagnosis with lung scintigraphy or CT angiography?To evaluate the rate of positive, negative, and indeterminate results and the agreement between initial and expert readings for lung scintigraphy and computed tomographic (CT) angiography performed in patients suspected of having pulmonary embolism (PE) during pregnancy.Institutional review board approval was obtained. The authors retrospectively analyzed the images from lung scintigraphy and CT angiography performed in pregnant patients during the past 9 years. Images from 46 CT angiographic examinations performed in 43 patients and 91 of 94 lung scintigraphic examinations were reviewed by experts, whose readings were then compared with the initial reports. For CT angiography, the quality of opacification was graded as good, suboptimal, or poor and intraarterial attenuation was measured.The rates of positive findings (seven of 43 patients [16%] with CT angiography and 10 of 91 patients [11%] with scintigraphy, P = .36), negative findings (28 of 43 patients [65%] with CT angiography and 64 of 91 patients [70%] with scintigraphy, P = .54), and indeterminate findings (eight of 43 patients [19%] with CT angiography and 17 of 91 patients [19%] with scintigraphy, P = .99) were similar for CT angiography and lung scintigraphy. There were four discrepancies between initial and expert readings for CT angiography (κ = 0.84; confidence interval: 0.68, 0.99) and 14 for lung scintigraphy (κ = 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.63, 0.87). Opacification was classified as good for only 23 of the 46 CT angiographic examinations (50%). Attenuation values were significantly different among the groups with good, suboptimal, or poor opacification. Alternative diagnoses unsuspected at chest radiography were demonstrated at CT angiography in five of the 43 patients (12%). The mean maternal radiation dose was 0.9 mSv for lung scintigraphy and 7.3 mSv for CT angiography.Lung scintigraphy and CT angiography have comparable performances for PE diagnosis during pregnancy. Interobserver agreement is better for CT angiography, which also enables alternative diagnosis of unsuspected disease but delivers higher maternal radiation dose.Outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with pulmonary angiography in pregnant women suspected of pulmonary embolism.Validated clinical pretest probability tools are lacking in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) in pregnancy, and the negative predictive value of D-dimers in this population has not been appropriately tested. The goal of this study was to evaluate outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with pulmonary angiography (MDCT-PA) for the diagnosis of PE in pregnancy in the absence of such measures.Imaging and medical record data, including clinical presentation, risk factors, and all imaging studies performed for the diagnosis of venous thromboembolism (VTE), of 343 pregnant women with PE were reviewed retrospectively. The imaging was performed at a large tertiary-care women's hospital between 2004 and 2008 using the same-generation MDCT scanner. Primary outcome measure was the occurrence of VTE events 3 months following MDCT-PA or 6 weeks postpartum (whichever came later).Dyspnea (75.6%) and chest pain (45.6%) were the most common complaints. Fifty-seven percent of patients had at least one additional risk factor other than pregnancy. Body mass index >30 was the most common risk factor (49%). Eight scans were positive for PE and one patient with a negative MDCT-PA had a positive upper-extremity ultrasound, yielding a diagnosis of VTE in 2.9%. Negative scans were technically adequate in 79.1%, technically limited in 20%, and inconclusive in 0.9%. Follow-up showed no symptomatic VTE events after index imaging.This study showed that MDCT-PA may safely exclude clinically significant PE in pregnancy.Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: clinical presentation, results of lung scanning, and subsequent maternal and pediatric outcomes.Ventilation-perfusion (VQ) scanning is used when pulmonary embolism (PE) is suspected during pregnancy; however, the distribution of lung scan results and safety of VQ scanning have never been studied.To study the distribution of lung scan results and safety of VQ scanning as well as the safety of withholding anticoagulation therapy following a normal or nondiagnostic scan in pregnant women.The study group comprised 120 consecutive pregnant women who presented with suspected PE. Clinical data were collected, and the lung scans were reinterpreted by 2 independent experts. Subsequent pregnancy and pediatric outcomes were determined by direct patient follow-up.During the study period, 120 pregnant women (mean age, 32 years) underwent 121 VQ scans. Eight cases (6.6%) were already receiving treatment for venous thromboembolism prior to VQ scanning. In the remaining 113 scans, 83 (73.5%) were interpreted as normal, 28 (24.8%) as nondiagnostic, and 2 (1.8%) as high probability. In the 104 women who did not receive anticoagulation therapy following lung scanning (80 normal and 24 nondiagnostic), no venous thromboembolic events were reported (mean [range] length of follow-up, 20.6 [0.5-108] months). Examination of pediatric data from 110 live births (90.2%) (mean [range] age, 20.5 [0.5-100] months) revealed no increase in the rates of congenital and developmental anomalies.The prevalence of high-probability VQ scans in pregnant women with suspected PE and probable PE is very low. Withholding anticoagulation in pregnant women with normal or nondiagnostic VQ scans is probably safe. In addition, pediatric risks from VQ scans are low. Large prospective studies are needed to evaluate diagnostic strategies for pregnant women with suspected PE.Diagnosing pulmonary embolism in pregnancy using computed-tomographic angiography or ventilation-perfusion.To estimate the rate of nondiagnosis for patients who initially undergo computed-tomographic angiography compared with those who undergo ventilation-perfusion imaging to diagnose pulmonary embolism in pregnancy.This was a retrospective cohort study of all women consecutively evaluated from 2001-2006 for clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism who were pregnant or 6 weeks postpartum and underwent at least computed-tomographic angiography or ventilation-perfusion scan. Charts were abstracted for history, clinical presentation, examination, imaging, and pregnancy and maternal outcomes. Women who underwent computed-tomographic angiography for initial diagnosis were compared with women who underwent ventilation-perfusion. Primary outcome was defined as a nondiagnostic study: nondiagnostic for pulmonary embolism in the computed-tomographic angiography group, or "low or intermediate probability" in the ventilation-perfusion group. Univariable, bivariable, and multivariable analyses were performed.Of 304 women with a clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism, initial diagnosis was sought by computed-tomographic angiography in 108 (35.1%) and by ventilation-perfusion in 196 (64.9%) women. Women who underwent computed-tomographic angiography tended to have a slightly higher rate of nondiagnostic study (17.0% compared with 13.2%, P=.38). Examining the subgroup of women with a normal chest X-ray, computed-tomographic angiography was much more likely to yield a nondiagnostic result than ventilation-perfusion, even after adjusting for relevant confounding effects (30.0% compared with 5.6%, adjusted odds ratio 5.4, 95% confidence interval 1.4-20.1, P<.01).Pregnant or postpartum women with clinical suspicion of a pulmonary embolism and a normal chest X-ray are more likely to have a diagnostic study from a ventilation-perfusion scan compared with a computed-tomographic angiography. Evidence supports computed-tomographic angiography as a better initial test than ventilation-perfusion in patients with an abnormal chest X-ray.II.Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: comparison of pulmonary CT angiography and lung scintigraphy.The purpose of this study was to retrospectively compare the diagnostic adequacy of lung scintigraphy with that of pulmonary CT angiography (CTA) in the care of pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism.Patient characteristics, radiology report content, additional imaging performed, final diagnosis, and diagnostic adequacy were recorded for pregnant patients consecutively referred for lung scintigraphy or pulmonary CTA according to physician preference. Measurements of pulmonary arterial enhancement were performed on all pulmonary CTA images of pregnant patients. Lung scintigraphy and pulmonary CTA studies deemed inadequate for diagnosis at the time of image acquisition were further assessed, and the cause of diagnostic inadequacy was determined. The relative contribution of the inferior vena cava to the right side of the heart was measured on nondiagnostic CTA images and compared with that on CTA images of age-matched nonpregnant women, who were the controls.Twenty-eight pulmonary CTA examinations were performed on 25 pregnant patients, and 25 lung scintigraphic studies were performed on 25 pregnant patients. Lung scintigraphy was more frequently adequate for diagnosis than was pulmonary CTA (4% vs 35.7%) (p = 0.0058). Pulmonary CTA had a higher diagnostic inadequacy rate among pregnant than nonpregnant women (35.7% vs 2.1%) (p < 0.001). Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava was identified in eight of 10 nondiagnostic pulmonary CTA studies.We found that lung scintigraphy was more reliable than pulmonary CTA in pregnant patients. Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava is a common finding at pulmonary CTA of pregnant patients.The value of ventilation-perfusion imaging in pregnancy.Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a major cause of maternal death during pregnancy. The aims of this retrospective study were to review 5 years experience of ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) imaging in pregnancy, to evaluate the effect of the V/Q scan report on the referring clinician's use of anticoagulants and to monitor the course and outcome of pregnancy. 82 patients (aged 17-44 years, gestation 6-40 weeks) underwent V/Q imaging for suspected PE, over a 5 year period. Modified PIOPED criteria were used to assess the probability of PE. 31 patients were shown to have normal scans (38%); 19 (23%) had low probability (LP) scans; 14 (17%) had intermediate probability (IP) scans and 18 (22%) had high probability (HP) scans for PE. Referring clinicians saw the reports and took action within 12 h. Anticoagulation was continued or started in 31 patients (all HP, 12 IP and 1 LP). Anticoagulation was considered unnecessary in 52 patients (all normal, 19 LP and 2 IP). None of the patients with normal or LP scans had documented PE during the follow-up period (median 25 months, range 3-60 months). No complications of anticoagulation were observed and no adverse outcome of pregnancy were reported. V/Q imaging is a valuable technique in the management of pregnant women suspected of having PE.Dose reduction in computed tomographic angiography of pregnant patients with suspected acute pulmonary embolism.The aim of this study was to quantify the effect of a reduced-dose pulmonary computed tomographic (CT) angiography protocol on radiation dose and image quality in pregnant patients as compared with a standard protocol.Twenty-six pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolism underwent reduced-dose CT angiography (200 mA and 100 kV, from the aortic arch to the diaphragm). The matched control group standard protocol was 400 mA, 120 kilovolt (peak), and the entire thorax. The CT dose index, dose-length product, effective dose, image quality, and signal-to-noise ratio were assessed and compared with the Wilcoxon rank sum test result.The CT dose index, mean dose-length product, and calculated effective dose were lower in the pregnancy group than in the controls: mean (SD), 5.21 (1.54) mGy versus 20.86 (5.59) mGy; 105.65 (39.77) mGy cm versus 575.71 (154.86) mGy cm, and 1.79 (0.676) msv versus 9.787 (2.63) msv, respectively (P < 0.0001). Quality scores of segmental (P = 0.266) and subsegmental (P = 0.207) arteries and arterial attenuation (P = 0.443) were similar.In pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism, combined reduction of kilovoltage and milliampere-second settings and z-axis coverage results in a substantial reduction of radiation dose while maintaining diagnostic imaging quality.Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: CT pulmonary angiography versus perfusion scanning.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the equivalence of CT pulmonary angiography and perfusion scanning in terms of diagnostic quality and negative predictive value in the imaging of pulmonary embolism (PE) in pregnancy.Between 2000 and 2007 at a university hospital and a large private hospital, 199 pregnant patients underwent 106 CT pulmonary angiographic examinations and 99 perfusion scans. Image quality was evaluated, and the findings were reread by radiologists and compared with the original clinical readings. Three-month follow-up findings of PE and deep venous thrombosis were recorded.PE was found in four of the 106 patients (3.7%) who underwent CT pulmonary angiography. The overall image quality was poor in 5.6% of cases, acceptable in 17.9%, and good in 76.4%. Fourteen CT and nine radiographic studies showed other clinically significant abnormalities. Six patients had indeterminate CT pulmonary angiographic findings, three had normal perfusion scans, and none underwent anticoagulation. All perfusion scan findings were normal. There was one incomplete study, and follow-up CT pulmonary angiography performed the same day showed PE. Two of 99 studies (2.02%) showed intermediate probability of the presence of PE; PE was not found at CT pulmonary angiography, but pneumonia was found. PE was found in one postpartum patient 9 weeks after she had undergone CT pulmonary angiography and ultrasound with normal findings. None of the patients died.CT pulmonary angiography and perfusion scanning have equivalent clinical negative predictive value (99% for CT pulmonary angiography; 100% for perfusion scanning) and image quality in the care of pregnant patients. Therefore, the choice of study should be based on other considerations, such as radiation concern, radiographic results, alternative diagnosis, and equipment availability. Reducing the amount of radiation to the maternal breast favors use of perfusion scanning when the radiographic findings are normal and there is no clinical suspicion of an alternative diagnosis.Pulmonary CT angiography protocol adapted to the hemodynamic effects of pregnancy.The purpose of this study was to compare the image quality of a standard pulmonary CT angiography (CTA) protocol with a pulmonary CTA protocol optimized for use in pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism (PE).Forty-five consecutive pregnant patients with suspected PE were retrospectively included in the study: 25 patients (group A) underwent standard-protocol pulmonary CTA and 20 patients (group B) were imaged using a protocol modified for pregnancy. The modified protocol used a shallow inspiration breath-hold and a high concentration, high rate of injection, and high volume of contrast material. Objective image quality and subjective image quality were evaluated by measuring pulmonary arterial enhancement, determining whether there was transient interruption of the contrast bolus by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava (IVC), and assessing diagnostic adequacy.Objective and subjective image quality were significantly better for group B-that is, for the group who underwent the CTA protocol optimized for pregnancy. Mean pulmonary arterial enhancement and the percentage of studies characterized as adequate for diagnosis were higher in group B than in group A: 321 ± 148 HU (SD) versus 178 ± 67 HU (p = 0.0001) and 90% versus 64% (p = 0.05), respectively. Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the IVC was observed more frequently in group A (39%) than in group B (10%) (p = 0.05).A pulmonary CTA protocol optimized for pregnancy significantly improved image quality by increasing pulmonary arterial opacification, improving diagnostic adequacy, and decreasing transient interruption of the contrast bolus by unopacified blood from the IVC.Evaluation of imaging quality of pulmonary 64-MDCT angiography in pregnancy and puerperium.The aim of this study was to quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate pulmonary 64-MDCT angiography image quality in pregnancy and puerperium, compared with female nonpregnant control subjects.The study group comprised 124 consecutive pregnant and postpartum women and 124 female nonpregnant control subjects who presented with suspected pulmonary embolism. The individual studies were evaluated for subjective and objective diagnostic quality.Objective measurements of the arterial enhancement in the pulmonary trunk and left and right pulmonary arteries found that there was no statistically significant difference in attenuation values between the pregnant and puerperium group and the control group for pulmonary artery opacification. The mean attenuation in the pulmonary trunk was 270.54 HU in the pregnant group, 277.53 HU in the puerperium group, and 293.90 HU in the control group.We found no significant difference in diagnostic quality of pulmonary CT angiography using MDCT between the study and control groups. The use of MDCT acquisition, faster injection rates, higher contrast medium concentration, and higher trigger levels may decrease the number of nondiagnostic studies in this population. MDCT may be a worthwhile investigation in the majority of pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism.Perfusion scintigraphy: diagnostic utility in pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolic disease.Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a major preventable cause of maternal mortality during pregnancy and accurate diagnosis is essential. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is a robust diagnostic test in non-pregnant patients with suspected PE. The potential latent carcinogenic effects of CTPA-related breast irradiation mandates careful use of this technique in young women. The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of perfusion scintigraphy as the first line investigation in pregnant women with suspected PE. All pregnant women referred for radiological investigation of suspected PE in a 5-year period from January 2001 to December 2005 were included. Demographic data and imaging studies were reviewed. Subsequent pregnancy outcome was determined by case note review. One hundred and five consecutive patients had either perfusion scintigraphy (Q scan) (n = 94), CTPA (n = 9) or both (n = 2), one patient presented twice. Q scans were the first line investigation in 96 (91%) patients. Eighty-nine (92%) scans were normal, seven (7%) were non-diagnostic and one (1%) was high probability. One patient had a thromboembolic event 3 weeks post partum. No adverse events were reported during the follow-up period. Pulmonary embolic disease is uncommon in pregnancy. Perfusion scintigraphy in pregnant patients has an excellent diagnostic yield. The percentage of non-diagnostic scans is much lower than in other patient groups. Scintigraphy imparts a significantly lower breast dose than CTPA and should be used as the first-line investigation in most pregnant patients with suspected PE.MRI of pregnant patients for suspected pulmonary embolism: steady-state free precession vs postgadolinium 3D-GRE.Pulmonary embolism is a leading cause of maternal mortality in the developed world. Ventilation-perfusion scintigraphy and Computer tomography cause ionizing radiation exposure. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging is generally not indicated in pregnant patients. MRI using motion resistant techniques that do not use intravenous contrast material, such as balanced steady-state free precession may be a better approach in pregnant patients.To describe the preliminary findings of the use of SSFP for the evaluation of pregnant patients with suspected PE, and to compare with a young women population evaluated with postgadolinium 3D-gradient echo sequences for the same intention.Radiology database was searched for two groups of subjects who underwent chest MRI at 1.5T for suspected PE, between January, 2007 and June, 2010: pregnant patients with MRI including balanced SSFP (group A) and females younger than 45 years old including a T1-weighted postgadolinium 3D-GRE (group B) sequence. The final study population consisted of 21 subjects. Blind and independent evaluation of MR images was performed for image quality of the pulmonary arterial system, PE and other chest findings. Data was subject to statistical analysis.Good image quality was observed in all central and lobar arteries on both groups and in 90% (group A) and at least 83.3% (group B) of the segmental arteries. There was no significant difference between groups A and B for image quality of central and lobar pulmonary arteries (p > 0.05).SSFP can visualize central, lobar and segmental pulmonary arteries with sufficient image quality in pregnant patients, comparable to 3D-GRE.Pulmonary embolism during pregnancy: diagnosis with lung scintigraphy or CT angiography?To evaluate the rate of positive, negative, and indeterminate results and the agreement between initial and expert readings for lung scintigraphy and computed tomographic (CT) angiography performed in patients suspected of having pulmonary embolism (PE) during pregnancy.Institutional review board approval was obtained. The authors retrospectively analyzed the images from lung scintigraphy and CT angiography performed in pregnant patients during the past 9 years. Images from 46 CT angiographic examinations performed in 43 patients and 91 of 94 lung scintigraphic examinations were reviewed by experts, whose readings were then compared with the initial reports. For CT angiography, the quality of opacification was graded as good, suboptimal, or poor and intraarterial attenuation was measured.The rates of positive findings (seven of 43 patients [16%] with CT angiography and 10 of 91 patients [11%] with scintigraphy, P = .36), negative findings (28 of 43 patients [65%] with CT angiography and 64 of 91 patients [70%] with scintigraphy, P = .54), and indeterminate findings (eight of 43 patients [19%] with CT angiography and 17 of 91 patients [19%] with scintigraphy, P = .99) were similar for CT angiography and lung scintigraphy. There were four discrepancies between initial and expert readings for CT angiography (κ = 0.84; confidence interval: 0.68, 0.99) and 14 for lung scintigraphy (κ = 0.75; 95% confidence interval: 0.63, 0.87). Opacification was classified as good for only 23 of the 46 CT angiographic examinations (50%). Attenuation values were significantly different among the groups with good, suboptimal, or poor opacification. Alternative diagnoses unsuspected at chest radiography were demonstrated at CT angiography in five of the 43 patients (12%). The mean maternal radiation dose was 0.9 mSv for lung scintigraphy and 7.3 mSv for CT angiography.Lung scintigraphy and CT angiography have comparable performances for PE diagnosis during pregnancy. Interobserver agreement is better for CT angiography, which also enables alternative diagnosis of unsuspected disease but delivers higher maternal radiation dose.Outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with pulmonary angiography in pregnant women suspected of pulmonary embolism.Validated clinical pretest probability tools are lacking in the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism (PE) in pregnancy, and the negative predictive value of D-dimers in this population has not been appropriately tested. The goal of this study was to evaluate outcomes of negative multidetector computed tomography with pulmonary angiography (MDCT-PA) for the diagnosis of PE in pregnancy in the absence of such measures.Imaging and medical record data, including clinical presentation, risk factors, and all imaging studies performed for the diagnosis of venous thromboembolism (VTE), of 343 pregnant women with PE were reviewed retrospectively. The imaging was performed at a large tertiary-care women's hospital between 2004 and 2008 using the same-generation MDCT scanner. Primary outcome measure was the occurrence of VTE events 3 months following MDCT-PA or 6 weeks postpartum (whichever came later).Dyspnea (75.6%) and chest pain (45.6%) were the most common complaints. Fifty-seven percent of patients had at least one additional risk factor other than pregnancy. Body mass index >30 was the most common risk factor (49%). Eight scans were positive for PE and one patient with a negative MDCT-PA had a positive upper-extremity ultrasound, yielding a diagnosis of VTE in 2.9%. Negative scans were technically adequate in 79.1%, technically limited in 20%, and inconclusive in 0.9%. Follow-up showed no symptomatic VTE events after index imaging.This study showed that MDCT-PA may safely exclude clinically significant PE in pregnancy.Suspected pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: clinical presentation, results of lung scanning, and subsequent maternal and pediatric outcomes.Ventilation-perfusion (VQ) scanning is used when pulmonary embolism (PE) is suspected during pregnancy; however, the distribution of lung scan results and safety of VQ scanning have never been studied.To study the distribution of lung scan results and safety of VQ scanning as well as the safety of withholding anticoagulation therapy following a normal or nondiagnostic scan in pregnant women.The study group comprised 120 consecutive pregnant women who presented with suspected PE. Clinical data were collected, and the lung scans were reinterpreted by 2 independent experts. Subsequent pregnancy and pediatric outcomes were determined by direct patient follow-up.During the study period, 120 pregnant women (mean age, 32 years) underwent 121 VQ scans. Eight cases (6.6%) were already receiving treatment for venous thromboembolism prior to VQ scanning. In the remaining 113 scans, 83 (73.5%) were interpreted as normal, 28 (24.8%) as nondiagnostic, and 2 (1.8%) as high probability. In the 104 women who did not receive anticoagulation therapy following lung scanning (80 normal and 24 nondiagnostic), no venous thromboembolic events were reported (mean [range] length of follow-up, 20.6 [0.5-108] months). Examination of pediatric data from 110 live births (90.2%) (mean [range] age, 20.5 [0.5-100] months) revealed no increase in the rates of congenital and developmental anomalies.The prevalence of high-probability VQ scans in pregnant women with suspected PE and probable PE is very low. Withholding anticoagulation in pregnant women with normal or nondiagnostic VQ scans is probably safe. In addition, pediatric risks from VQ scans are low. Large prospective studies are needed to evaluate diagnostic strategies for pregnant women with suspected PE.Diagnosing pulmonary embolism in pregnancy using computed-tomographic angiography or ventilation-perfusion.To estimate the rate of nondiagnosis for patients who initially undergo computed-tomographic angiography compared with those who undergo ventilation-perfusion imaging to diagnose pulmonary embolism in pregnancy.This was a retrospective cohort study of all women consecutively evaluated from 2001-2006 for clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism who were pregnant or 6 weeks postpartum and underwent at least computed-tomographic angiography or ventilation-perfusion scan. Charts were abstracted for history, clinical presentation, examination, imaging, and pregnancy and maternal outcomes. Women who underwent computed-tomographic angiography for initial diagnosis were compared with women who underwent ventilation-perfusion. Primary outcome was defined as a nondiagnostic study: nondiagnostic for pulmonary embolism in the computed-tomographic angiography group, or "low or intermediate probability" in the ventilation-perfusion group. Univariable, bivariable, and multivariable analyses were performed.Of 304 women with a clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolism, initial diagnosis was sought by computed-tomographic angiography in 108 (35.1%) and by ventilation-perfusion in 196 (64.9%) women. Women who underwent computed-tomographic angiography tended to have a slightly higher rate of nondiagnostic study (17.0% compared with 13.2%, P=.38). Examining the subgroup of women with a normal chest X-ray, computed-tomographic angiography was much more likely to yield a nondiagnostic result than ventilation-perfusion, even after adjusting for relevant confounding effects (30.0% compared with 5.6%, adjusted odds ratio 5.4, 95% confidence interval 1.4-20.1, P<.01).Pregnant or postpartum women with clinical suspicion of a pulmonary embolism and a normal chest X-ray are more likely to have a diagnostic study from a ventilation-perfusion scan compared with a computed-tomographic angiography. Evidence supports computed-tomographic angiography as a better initial test than ventilation-perfusion in patients with an abnormal chest X-ray.II.Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: comparison of pulmonary CT angiography and lung scintigraphy.The purpose of this study was to retrospectively compare the diagnostic adequacy of lung scintigraphy with that of pulmonary CT angiography (CTA) in the care of pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism.Patient characteristics, radiology report content, additional imaging performed, final diagnosis, and diagnostic adequacy were recorded for pregnant patients consecutively referred for lung scintigraphy or pulmonary CTA according to physician preference. Measurements of pulmonary arterial enhancement were performed on all pulmonary CTA images of pregnant patients. Lung scintigraphy and pulmonary CTA studies deemed inadequate for diagnosis at the time of image acquisition were further assessed, and the cause of diagnostic inadequacy was determined. The relative contribution of the inferior vena cava to the right side of the heart was measured on nondiagnostic CTA images and compared with that on CTA images of age-matched nonpregnant women, who were the controls.Twenty-eight pulmonary CTA examinations were performed on 25 pregnant patients, and 25 lung scintigraphic studies were performed on 25 pregnant patients. Lung scintigraphy was more frequently adequate for diagnosis than was pulmonary CTA (4% vs 35.7%) (p = 0.0058). Pulmonary CTA had a higher diagnostic inadequacy rate among pregnant than nonpregnant women (35.7% vs 2.1%) (p < 0.001). Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava was identified in eight of 10 nondiagnostic pulmonary CTA studies.We found that lung scintigraphy was more reliable than pulmonary CTA in pregnant patients. Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava is a common finding at pulmonary CTA of pregnant patients.The value of ventilation-perfusion imaging in pregnancy.Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a major cause of maternal death during pregnancy. The aims of this retrospective study were to review 5 years experience of ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) imaging in pregnancy, to evaluate the effect of the V/Q scan report on the referring clinician's use of anticoagulants and to monitor the course and outcome of pregnancy. 82 patients (aged 17-44 years, gestation 6-40 weeks) underwent V/Q imaging for suspected PE, over a 5 year period. Modified PIOPED criteria were used to assess the probability of PE. 31 patients were shown to have normal scans (38%); 19 (23%) had low probability (LP) scans; 14 (17%) had intermediate probability (IP) scans and 18 (22%) had high probability (HP) scans for PE. Referring clinicians saw the reports and took action within 12 h. Anticoagulation was continued or started in 31 patients (all HP, 12 IP and 1 LP). Anticoagulation was considered unnecessary in 52 patients (all normal, 19 LP and 2 IP). None of the patients with normal or LP scans had documented PE during the follow-up period (median 25 months, range 3-60 months). No complications of anticoagulation were observed and no adverse outcome of pregnancy were reported. V/Q imaging is a valuable technique in the management of pregnant women suspected of having PE.Dose reduction in computed tomographic angiography of pregnant patients with suspected acute pulmonary embolism.The aim of this study was to quantify the effect of a reduced-dose pulmonary computed tomographic (CT) angiography protocol on radiation dose and image quality in pregnant patients as compared with a standard protocol.Twenty-six pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolism underwent reduced-dose CT angiography (200 mA and 100 kV, from the aortic arch to the diaphragm). The matched control group standard protocol was 400 mA, 120 kilovolt (peak), and the entire thorax. The CT dose index, dose-length product, effective dose, image quality, and signal-to-noise ratio were assessed and compared with the Wilcoxon rank sum test result.The CT dose index, mean dose-length product, and calculated effective dose were lower in the pregnancy group than in the controls: mean (SD), 5.21 (1.54) mGy versus 20.86 (5.59) mGy; 105.65 (39.77) mGy cm versus 575.71 (154.86) mGy cm, and 1.79 (0.676) msv versus 9.787 (2.63) msv, respectively (P < 0.0001). Quality scores of segmental (P = 0.266) and subsegmental (P = 0.207) arteries and arterial attenuation (P = 0.443) were similar.In pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism, combined reduction of kilovoltage and milliampere-second settings and z-axis coverage results in a substantial reduction of radiation dose while maintaining diagnostic imaging quality.Pulmonary embolism in pregnancy: CT pulmonary angiography versus perfusion scanning.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the equivalence of CT pulmonary angiography and perfusion scanning in terms of diagnostic quality and negative predictive value in the imaging of pulmonary embolism (PE) in pregnancy.Between 2000 and 2007 at a university hospital and a large private hospital, 199 pregnant patients underwent 106 CT pulmonary angiographic examinations and 99 perfusion scans. Image quality was evaluated, and the findings were reread by radiologists and compared with the original clinical readings. Three-month follow-up findings of PE and deep venous thrombosis were recorded.PE was found in four of the 106 patients (3.7%) who underwent CT pulmonary angiography. The overall image quality was poor in 5.6% of cases, acceptable in 17.9%, and good in 76.4%. Fourteen CT and nine radiographic studies showed other clinically significant abnormalities. Six patients had indeterminate CT pulmonary angiographic findings, three had normal perfusion scans, and none underwent anticoagulation. All perfusion scan findings were normal. There was one incomplete study, and follow-up CT pulmonary angiography performed the same day showed PE. Two of 99 studies (2.02%) showed intermediate probability of the presence of PE; PE was not found at CT pulmonary angiography, but pneumonia was found. PE was found in one postpartum patient 9 weeks after she had undergone CT pulmonary angiography and ultrasound with normal findings. None of the patients died.CT pulmonary angiography and perfusion scanning have equivalent clinical negative predictive value (99% for CT pulmonary angiography; 100% for perfusion scanning) and image quality in the care of pregnant patients. Therefore, the choice of study should be based on other considerations, such as radiation concern, radiographic results, alternative diagnosis, and equipment availability. Reducing the amount of radiation to the maternal breast favors use of perfusion scanning when the radiographic findings are normal and there is no clinical suspicion of an alternative diagnosis.Pulmonary CT angiography protocol adapted to the hemodynamic effects of pregnancy.The purpose of this study was to compare the image quality of a standard pulmonary CT angiography (CTA) protocol with a pulmonary CTA protocol optimized for use in pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism (PE).Forty-five consecutive pregnant patients with suspected PE were retrospectively included in the study: 25 patients (group A) underwent standard-protocol pulmonary CTA and 20 patients (group B) were imaged using a protocol modified for pregnancy. The modified protocol used a shallow inspiration breath-hold and a high concentration, high rate of injection, and high volume of contrast material. Objective image quality and subjective image quality were evaluated by measuring pulmonary arterial enhancement, determining whether there was transient interruption of the contrast bolus by unopacified blood from the inferior vena cava (IVC), and assessing diagnostic adequacy.Objective and subjective image quality were significantly better for group B-that is, for the group who underwent the CTA protocol optimized for pregnancy. Mean pulmonary arterial enhancement and the percentage of studies characterized as adequate for diagnosis were higher in group B than in group A: 321 ± 148 HU (SD) versus 178 ± 67 HU (p = 0.0001) and 90% versus 64% (p = 0.05), respectively. Transient interruption of contrast material by unopacified blood from the IVC was observed more frequently in group A (39%) than in group B (10%) (p = 0.05).A pulmonary CTA protocol optimized for pregnancy significantly improved image quality by increasing pulmonary arterial opacification, improving diagnostic adequacy, and decreasing transient interruption of the contrast bolus by unopacified blood from the IVC.Evaluation of imaging quality of pulmonary 64-MDCT angiography in pregnancy and puerperium.The aim of this study was to quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate pulmonary 64-MDCT angiography image quality in pregnancy and puerperium, compared with female nonpregnant control subjects.The study group comprised 124 consecutive pregnant and postpartum women and 124 female nonpregnant control subjects who presented with suspected pulmonary embolism. The individual studies were evaluated for subjective and objective diagnostic quality.Objective measurements of the arterial enhancement in the pulmonary trunk and left and right pulmonary arteries found that there was no statistically significant difference in attenuation values between the pregnant and puerperium group and the control group for pulmonary artery opacification. The mean attenuation in the pulmonary trunk was 270.54 HU in the pregnant group, 277.53 HU in the puerperium group, and 293.90 HU in the control group.We found no significant difference in diagnostic quality of pulmonary CT angiography using MDCT between the study and control groups. The use of MDCT acquisition, faster injection rates, higher contrast medium concentration, and higher trigger levels may decrease the number of nondiagnostic studies in this population. MDCT may be a worthwhile investigation in the majority of pregnant patients with suspected pulmonary embolism.Perfusion scintigraphy: diagnostic utility in pregnant women with suspected pulmonary embolic disease.Pulmonary embolism (PE) is a major preventable cause of maternal mortality during pregnancy and accurate diagnosis is essential. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is a robust diagnostic test in non-pregnant patients with suspected PE. The potential latent carcinogenic effects of CTPA-related breast irradiation mandates careful use of this technique in young women. The aim of this study was to determine the efficacy of perfusion scintigraphy as the first line investigation in pregnant women with suspected PE. All pregnant women referred for radiological investigation of suspected PE in a 5-year period from January 2001 to December 2005 were included. Demographic data and imaging studies were reviewed. Subsequent pregnancy outcome was determined by case note review. One hundred and five consecutive patients had either perfusion scintigraphy (Q scan) (n = 94), CTPA (n = 9) or both (n = 2), one patient presented twice. Q scans were the first line investigation in 96 (91%) patients. Eighty-nine (92%) scans were normal, seven (7%) were non-diagnostic and one (1%) was high probability. One patient had a thromboembolic event 3 weeks post partum. No adverse events were reported during the follow-up period. Pulmonary embolic disease is uncommon in pregnancy. Perfusion scintigraphy in pregnant patients has an excellent diagnostic yield. The percentage of non-diagnostic scans is much lower than in other patient groups. Scintigraphy imparts a significantly lower breast dose than CTPA and should be used as the first-line investigation in most pregnant patients with suspected PE.