[Application of ultrasound guidance for ilioinguinal or iliohypogastric nerve block in pediatric inguinal surgery].To evaluate the efficacy of ultrasound guidance for ilioinguinal or iliohypogastric nerve block in pediatric outpatients undergoing inguinal surgery.The present study was approved by the ethics committee of our hospital. One hundred children with ASA status I, aged 4 - 8 years old, scheduled for unilateral inguinal surgery were randomly divided into ultrasound group (Group U) and traditional group (Group T) (n = 50 each). Upon entering operation room, they were monitored by electrocardiography (ECG), heart rate (HR) and oxygen saturation (SpO(2)). After an induction of general anesthesia, intravenous access was established and laryngeal mask inserted with spontaneous breathing. Intraoperative anesthesia was maintained with 2% sevoflurane in 50% nitrous oxide with 50% oxygen. Children in Group U received an ilioinguinal or iliohypogastric block under ultrasonic guidance with a mixture of 0.8% lidocaine and 0.25% levobupivacaine at 0.2 ml/kg while those in Group T performed according to the traditional method of anatomical localization with the same local anesthetic at 0.3 ml/kg. During surgery, the vital signs of HR, respiratory rate (RR), SpO(2), partial pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide (P(ET)CO(2)) and exhaled sevoflurane concentration were recorded. Additional intraoperative analgesic requirements were recorded. Face legs activity cry consolability (FLACC) score was used to assess the pain score postoperatively at recovery time, 2 and 4 h postoperation respectively. If the pain score was above 3, the child received acetaminophen rectally. The number of postoperative rectal acetaminophen was recorded. The degrees of parental satisfaction were investigated at 2 and 4 h postoperation. Intra-or postoperative adverse events were also recorded.HR at skin incision and sac traction in Group U was significantly lower than those in Group T (P < 0.05). Six children (12%) needed to increase inhaled sevoflurane concentration during operation in Group U versus 17 (34%) in Group T (P < 0.05). The pain score at recovery time, 2 and 4 h postoperation in Group U was significantly lower than those in T group (P < 0.05). Only 4 children (8%) needed postoperative rectal acetaminophen in Group U versus 13 (26%) in Group T (P < 0.05). The degree of parental satisfaction at 2 h postoperation was significantly higher in Group U than that in Group T (P < 0.05). One case in Group T had needle puncturing into blood vessels. No other adverse event was observed in two groups.The method of ultrasonic guidance for ilioinguinal or iliohypogastric nerve block is both feasible and effective. It can not only enhance the effect of nerve block, reduce the occurrences of complications, lower the quantity of local anesthetic and alleviate the medicinal toxicity.A randomized comparison of caudal block by sacral hiatus injection under ultrasound guidance with traditional sacral canal injection in children.There is a risk of inadvertent dural or vascular puncture for the traditional single-shot caudal block performed by inserting the needle into the sacral canal through the sacral hiatus. This prospective, randomized study was to evaluate the clinical feasibility of the hiatus injection under ultrasound guidance for caudal block in children.140 ASA I-II children undergoing inguinal hernia repair were randomly allocated to one of two groups (Group C or Group H, n = 70). 1 ml·kg(-1) of 0.25% ropivacaine was injected after the needle was inserted into the sacral canal in Group C, or after the needle pierced the sacrococcygeal ligament under a transverse ultrasound view in Group H. Success rate of block, puncture frequency, complications, and durations of block were recorded.The success rate of block was similar between two groups (95.7% in Group C vs 92.8% in Group H, P > 0.05). The first puncture success rate was higher, and the durations of block were shorter in Group H than in Group C (92.8% vs 60% and 145 ± 23s vs 164 ± 31s, respectively P < 0.05). Bloody puncture had an incidence of 18.6% in Group C and 5.7% in Group H (P < 0.05). Subcutaneous bulging occurred in six patients (7.1%) in Group C but none in Group H (P < 0.05).Sacral hiatus injection offers a reliable caudal block for pediatric inguinal hernia repair with the advantages of easier performance and fewer complications compared with traditional sacral canal injection.Ultrasonography for ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve blocks in children.The ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve block is a popular regional anaesthetic technique for children undergoing inguinal surgery. The success rate is only 70-80% and complications may occur. A prospective randomized double-blinded study was designed to compare the use of ultrasonography with the conventional ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve block technique.One hundred children (age range, 1 month-8 years) scheduled for inguinal hernia repair, orchidopexy or hydrocele repair were included in the study. Following induction of general anaesthesia, the children received an ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric block performed either under ultrasound guidance using levobupivacaine 0.25% until both nerves were surrounded by the local anaesthetic or by the conventional 'fascial click' method using levobupivacaine 0.25% (0.3 ml kg(-1)). Additional intra- and postoperative analgesic requirements were recorded.Ultrasonographic visualization of the ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerves was possible in all cases. The amount of local anaesthetic used in the ultrasound group was significantly lower than in the 'fascial click' group (0.19 (SD 0.05) ml kg(-1) vs 0.3 ml kg(-1), P<0.0001). During the intraoperative period 4% of the children in the ultrasound group received additional analgesics compared with 26% in the fascial click group (P=0.004). Only three children (6%) in the ultrasound-guided group needed postoperative rectal acetaminophen compared with 20 children (40%) in the fascial click group (P<0.0001).Ultrasound-guided ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve blocks can be achieved with significantly smaller volumes of local anaesthetics. The intra- and postoperative requirements for additional analgesia are significantly lower than with the conventional method.Comparison of the analgesic efficacy of ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block and local anesthetic infiltration for laparoscopic percutaneous extraperitoneal closure in children.Ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block and local anesthetic infiltration are the standard options to improve postoperative pain for children undergoing surgery with a midline incision. However, there is no study comparing the effect of ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block with local anesthetic infiltration for children undergoing laparoscopic surgery.The aim of this trial was to compare the onset of ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block with that of local anesthetic infiltration for laparoscopic percutaneous extraperitoneal closure in children.We performed an observer-blinded, randomized, prospective trial. Enrolled patients were assigned to either an ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block group or a local anesthetic infiltration group. The ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block group (n = 17) received ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block with 0.2 ml·kgOf the 37 patients enrolled in this study, 34 completed the study protocol. A significant difference in the pain scale between the ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block group and local anesthetic infiltration group was found at 0 min (median: 0, interquartile range [IQR]: 0-1.5, vs median: 1, IQR 0-5, confidence interval of median [95% CI]: 0-3, P = 0.048), but no significant difference was found at 30 min (median: 1, IQR: 0-4 vs median: 6, IQR: 0-7, 95% CI: 0-5, P = 0.061), or 60 min (median: 0, IQR: 0-2 vs median: 1, IQR: 0-3, 95% CI: -1 to 1, P = 0.310). No significant difference was found in anesthesia time between the ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block and local anesthetic infiltration groups. No procedure-related complications were observed in either group.Ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block is a quicker way to control postoperative pain for pediatric patients undergoing laparoscopic extraperitoneal closure than local anesthetic infiltration, and thus may provide a clinical benefit.Ultrasound-assisted transversus abdominis plane block vs wound infiltration in pediatric patient with inguinal hernia: randomized controlled trial.To compare the analgesic efficacy of ultrasound-assisted transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block and wound infiltration during the first postoperative 24hours.A prospective, observer-blinded, randomized, and controlled studyOperating room of a university hospital.Forty patients received a TAP block (TAP group) and 40 patients received wound infiltration (INF group) at the end of the surgery.Patients were randomized to receive a TAP block or wound infiltration. Postoperative analgesics were administered on request and selected based on pain severity.Pain scores, analgesic drug requirement, and side effects were observed for 24hours.Postoperative pain scores were lower in TAP group compared to INF group (P<.001). Analgesic consumption was significantly higher at the 5th minute and 1st, 6th, and 12th hours in the INF group (P<.001). The frequency of additional analgesic use in home and the total analgesic used during the postoperative 24hours were significantly higher in INF group (P<.001). Side effects were lower in the TAP group. Parent's satisfaction scores were higher in TAP group.Transversus abdominis plane block is effective method with convenient technique, drug dosage, and volume in pediatric patients undergoing inguinal hernia surgery.Comparison of success rate of ultrasound-guided sciatic and femoral nerve block and neurostimulation in children with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita: a randomized clinical trial.Arthrogryposis multiplex congenital is hallmarked with immobile joints and muscle fibrosis. The main objective of this study was to compare the success rate of ultrasound-guided sciatic and femoral nerve blocks with nerve stimulations in children diagnosed with distal arthrogryposis multiplex congenita.Sixty children aged 8 months to 2 years posted for foot surgery were randomly assigned to group NS and group US of 30 each. Under general anesthesia, femoro-sciatic block was performed with nerve stimulator guidance in group NS and ultrasound guidance in group US.Group NS: 23 of 30 (76.7%) children showed ankle movement with sciatic neurostimulation. In 7 (23.6%), distal motor response could not be elicited and the block was abandoned. Out of 23 children who could be given femoral block, in 12 (52%) patients quadriceps contractions were not elicited and fascia iliaca block was given. All 23 blocks were successful. CHIPPS score at 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h was 1.05 ± 0.90, 1.82 ± 1.18, 3.36 ± 1.65, 2.23 ± 2.02, and 1.18 ± 1.14, respectively. Group US: In 29 of 30 patients (96.6%), sciatic nerve was visualized with ultrasonography. All 29 children received femoral block, and they were successful. The odds of success in group US were 8.9 (95% confidence interval [1.0, 77.9]) as compared with NS group. The difference in success rate was statistically significant (P = 0.026). The analgesic duration difference in the US and NS groups was a mean 7.62 ± 0.57 h in group NS and 8.60 ± 0.66 h in group US (statistically significant [P < 0.001]). CHIPPS score at 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h was 0.79 ± 0.96, 1.61 ± 0.92, 2.96 ± 1.04, 2.36 ± 2.54, and 1.14 ± 1.01, respectively. The difference between the CHIPPS score was not statistically significant.Ultrasonography significantly increases the success rate of sciatic and femoral block in arthrogryposis.Unilateral paravertebral block compared with subarachnoid anesthesia for the management of postoperative pain syndrome after inguinal herniorrhaphy: a randomized controlled clinical trial.Inguinal herniorrhaphy is a common surgical procedure. The aim of this investigation was to determine whether unilateral paravertebral block could provide better control of postoperative pain syndrome compared with unilateral subarachnoid block (SAB). A randomized controlled study was conducted using 50 patients with unilateral inguinal hernias. The patients were randomized to receive either paravertebral block (S group) or SAB (C group). Paravertebral block was performed by injecting a total of 20 mL of 0.5% levobupivacaine from T9 to T12 under ultrasound guidance, whereas SAB was performed by injecting 13 mg of 0.5% levobupivacaine at the L3 to L4 level. Data regarding anesthesia, hemodynamic changes, side effects, time spent in the postanesthesia care unit, the Karnofsky Performance Status, acute pain and neuropathic disturbances were recorded. Paravertebral block provided good anesthesia of the inguinal region without patient or surgeon discomfort, with better hemodynamic stability and safety and with a reduced time to discharge from the postanesthesia care unit compared with SAB. During the postsurgical and posthospital discharge follow-ups, rest and incident pain and neuropathic positive phenomena were better controlled in the S group than in the C group. The consumption of painkillers was higher in the C group than in the S group throughout the follow-up period. Paravertebral block can be considered a viable alternative to common anesthetic procedures performed for inguinal hernia repair surgery. Paravertebral block provided good management of acute postoperative pain and limited neuropathic postoperative disturbances. Ultrasound versus landmark-based technique for ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric nerve blockade in children: the implications on plasma levels of ropivacaine.Ilioinguinal-iliohypogastric nerve blockade (INB) is associated with high plasma concentrations of local anesthetics (LAs) in children. Ultrasonographic guidance enables exact anatomical administration of LA, which may alter plasma levels. Accordingly, we compared plasma levels of ropivacaine after ultrasonographic versus landmark-based INB.After induction of general anesthesia, 66 children (8-84 mo) scheduled for inguinal hernia repair received INB with 0.25 mL/kg of ropivacaine 0.5% (1.25 mg/kg) either by a landmark-based (n = 31) or by an ultrasound-guided technique (n = 35). Ropivacaine plasma levels were measured before (0) and 5, 10, 20, and 30 min after the LA injection, using high-performance liquid chromatography. Maximum plasma concentrations (C(max)), time to C(max) (t(max)), the absorption rate constant (k(a)), the speed of rise of the plasma concentration at Time 0 (dC(0)/dt), and area under the curve value (AUC) were determined.The ultrasound-guided technique resulted in higher C(max) (sd), k(a), dC(0)/dt, and AUC values and shorter t(max) compared with the landmark-based technique (C(max): 1.78 [0.62] vs 1.23 [0.70] microg/mL, P < 0.01; k(a): 14.4 [10.7] vs 11.7 [11.4] h(-1), P < 0.05; dC(0)/dt: 0.26 [0.12] vs 0.15 [0.03] microg/mL . min, P < 0.01; AUC: 42.4 [15.9] vs 27.2 [18.1] microg . 30 min/mL, P < 0.001; t(max): 20.4 [8.6] vs 25.3 [7.6] min, P < 0.05).The pharmacokinetic data indicate faster absorption and higher maximal plasma concentration of LA when ultrasound was used as a guidance technique for INB compared with the landmark-based technique. Thus, a reduction of the volume of LA should be considered when using an ultrasound-guided technique for INB.Ultrasound-Guided Regional Anesthesia for Pediatric Burn Reconstructive Surgery: A Prospective Study.Pediatric patients face multiple reconstructive surgeries to reestablish function and aesthetics postburn injury. Often, the site of the harvested graft for these reconstructions is reported to be the most painful part of the procedure and a common reason for deferring these reconstructive procedures. This study in pediatric burn patients undergoing reconstructive procedures examined the analgesia response to local anesthetic infiltration versus either a single ultrasound-guided regional nerve block of the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (LFCN) or a fascia iliaca compartment block with catheter placement and continuous infusion. Nineteen patients were randomized to one of three groups (infiltration, single-shot nerve block, or compartment block with catheter) and received intraoperative analgesia intervention. Postoperatively, visual analog scale pain scores were recorded-for pain at the donor site-every 4 hours while awake-for 48 hours. This nonparametric data was analyzed using a two-way ANOVA, Friedman's test, and Kruskal-Wallis test, with significance determined at P < 0.05. The analysis demonstrated that the patients in the regional anesthesia groups were significantly more comfortable over the 48 hour hospital course than the patients in the control group. The patients receiving a single-shot block of the LFCN were more comfortable on postoperative day (POD) 0 while the catheter patients were more comfortable on POD 1 and POD 2. There was not a statistically significant difference in opioid requirements in any group. Regional anesthetic block of the LFCN, with or without catheter placement, provides an improved postoperative experience for the pediatric patient undergoing reconstructive surgery with lateral/anterolateral skin graft versus local anesthesia infiltration of donor site. For optimal comfort throughout the postoperative period, an ultrasound-guided block with continuous catheter may be beneficial.Does ultrasound guidance improve the efficacy of dorsal penile nerve block in children?Penile nerve block (PNB) is a well-established technique used for circumcision; it requires the injection of local anesthetics close to the dorsal nerve of the penis. The goal of this study was to compare the efficacy of ultrasound-guided PNB versus the classical landmark-based technique (LBT) in children undergoing circumcision.Forty boys, aged 1-14 years old that were scheduled for circumcision were randomly assigned to ultrasound-guided and landmark-based groups. All patients were placed under standard anesthesia with sevoflurane. In each group, patients received the penile block with ropivacaine, 0.75 mg·kg(-1) per side, and 0.05 mg·kg(-1) at the penis base. Groups were compared for intraoperative failure rate of the block, anesthesia time, postoperative pain scale, time of first required dose of paracetamol, time to first micturition, and average duration of stay in the postanesthesia care unit. The failure rate of dorsal PNB was not statistically different between groups (P = 0.5). Ultrasound guidance improved the efficacy of the PNB compared to the LBT in terms of postoperative pain scores on arrival in the PACU (P < 0.01) and after 30 min (P < 0.01). The ultrasound-guided technique also delayed the time to the first paracetamol dose administration (P < 0.0001), but the duration of the procedure, defined as the time between anesthesia induction and the end of surgery, was increased by 10 min in the US-guided group (P = 0.001). Ultrasound-guided PNB improved the efficacy of the block compared with the LBT in terms of the postoperative pain during the first postoperative hour and the time to the first requirement for postoperative analgesia.Prospective randomized observer-blinded study comparing the analgesic efficacy of ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block and local anaesthetic infiltration for umbilical hernia repair.Umbilical hernia repair, a common day-surgery procedure in children, is associated with considerable postoperative discomfort. Possible modes of postoperative analgesia for umbilical hernia repair are rectus sheath block (RSB) and local anaesthetic infiltration of the surgical site (LAI).We undertook an observer-blinded, randomized, prospective, observational study to compare the efficacy of ultrasound-guided RSB and LAI in providing postoperative analgesia for umbilical hernia repair. Our primary objective was to compare the use of opioid medication between patients who receive RSB and those who receive LAI. Our secondary objectives were to compare the duration of analgesia based on time to first rescue analgesic, to compare the quality of analgesia based on revised FACES scale, and to determine the incidence of side-effects.Fifty-two patients (26 in each group) completed the study. There was a statistically significant difference in the perioperative opioid medication consumption between the LAI group [mean: 0.13 mg kg(-1), confidence interval (0.09-0.17 mg kg⁻¹)] and the RSB group [mean: 0.07 mg kg⁻¹, confidence interval (0.05-0.09 mg kg⁻¹)] (P=0.008). When we compared the postoperative opioid consumption between the LAI group [mean: 0.1 mg kg⁻¹, 95% confidence interval (0.07-0.13 mg kg⁻¹)] and the RSB group [mean: 0.07 mg kg(-1), 95% confidence interval (0.05-0.09 mg kg⁻¹)] (P=0.09), there was a trend towards statistical significance between the two groups. The difference in time to rescue analgesic administration between the RSB group [49.7 (36.9) min] and the LAI group [32.4 (29.4) min] was not statistically significant (P=0.11).This study demonstrates that ultrasound-guided RSB provides superior analgesia in the perioperative period compared with infiltration of the surgical site after umbilical hernia repair. In comparing only the postoperative period, analgesia provided by an ultrasound-guided RSB showed a trend towards statistically significant improvement compared with infiltration of the surgical site.Ultrasound assessment of cranial spread during caudal blockade in children: effect of the speed of injection of local anaesthetics.Despite caudal blockade being the most widely used regional anaesthetic procedure for infants and children undergoing subumbilical surgery, the question whether the injection velocity of the local anaesthetic itself affects its spread in the epidural space has not yet been investigated. Thus, the aim of the present study was to measure the cranial spread of caudally administered local anaesthetics in infants and children by means of real-time ultrasonography, with a special focus on comparing the effect of using two different speeds of injection.Fifty ASA I-II infants and children, aged up to 6 yr, weighing up to 25 kg, undergoing subumbilical surgery, were enrolled in this prospective, randomized, observer-blinded study. Caudal blockade was performed under ultrasound observation using ropivacaine 1 ml kg(-1) 0.2% or 0.35% and an injection given at either 0.25 ml s(-1) or 0.5 ml s(-1), respectively.Ultrasound observation of the local anaesthetic flow and the extent of cranial spread was possible in all patients. All caudal blocks were considered successful, and all surgical procedures could be completed without any indications of insufficient analgesia. No statistically significant difference could be observed between the two injection speeds regarding the cranial spread of the local anaesthetic in the epidural space.The main finding of the present study is that the speed of injection of the local anaesthetic does not affect its cranial spread during caudal blockade in infants and children. Therefore, the prediction of the cranial spread of the local anaesthetic, depending on the injection speed, is not possible.Application of Ultrasound-Guided Ilioinguinal/Iliohypogastric Nerve Block in Pediatric Same-Day Surgery.The aim of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of ultrasound-guided ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve block (IINB) in pediatric patients undergoing same-day inguinal region surgery. Ninety patients aged 4-6 years, ASA levels I-II, were randomly divided into three groups: U, T, or C (n = 30 each). After basic anesthesia, patients in group U underwent ultrasound-guided IINB, those in group T underwent traditional Schulte-Steinberg IINB, and those in group C (controls) received intravenous anesthesia (ketamine-propofol) only. Patients who remained sensitive to intraoperative stimuli received additional intravenous doses of 1 mg/kg ketamine. Heart rate (HR), mean arterial pressure (MAP), and oxygen saturation (SPO2) were recorded upon entering the operating room (T0), at skin incision (T1), while pulling the hernia sac (T2), during skin closing (T3), and upon awakening (T4) at recovery. HR and MAP at T1, T2, and T4 were higher in group C than those in the other two groups, and recovery time in group C was significantly prolonged (P < 0.05). Group U required significantly lower quantities and frequency of ketamine injection, and pain scores in group U during awakening were lower than those in the other two groups (P < 0.05). Ultrasound-guided IINB provided an improved nerve block effect and postoperative analgesia, reduced the amount of local anesthetic required, facilitated more rapid postoperative recovery, and was a safe and effective method of anesthesia. Ultrasound guidance for infraclavicular brachial plexus anaesthesia in children.Ultrasonography may offer significant advantages in regional anaesthesia of the upper and lower limbs. It is not known if the same advantages demonstrated in adults also apply to children. We therefore performed a prospective, randomised study comparing ultrasound visualisation to conventional nerve stimulation for infraclavicular brachial plexus anasesthesia in children. Forty children scheduled for arm and forearm surgery underwent infraclavicular brachial plexus blocks with ropivacaine 0.5 ml.kg(-1) guided by either nerve stimulation or ultrasound visualisation. Evaluated parameters included sensory block quality, sensory block distribution and motor block. All surgical procedures were performed under brachial plexus anaesthesia alone. Direct ultrasound visualisation was successful in all cases and was associated with significant improvements when compared with the use of nerve stimulation: lower visual analogue scores during puncture (p = 0.03), shorter mean (median) sensory onset times (9 (5-15) min vs. 15 (5-25) min, p < 0.001), longer sensory block durations (384 (280-480) min vs. 310 (210-420) min, p < 0.001), and better sensory and motor block scores 10 min after block insertion. Ultrasound visualisation offers faster sensory and motor responses and a longer duration of sensory blockade than nerve stimulation in children undergoing infraclavicular brachial plexus blocks. In addition, the pain associated with nerve stimulation due to muscle contractions at the time of insertion is eliminated.Unilateral groin surgery in children: will the addition of an ultrasound-guided ilioinguinal nerve block enhance the duration of analgesia of a single-shot caudal block?Inguinal hernia repair, hydrocelectomy, and orchidopexy are commonly performed surgical procedures in children. Postoperative pain control is usually provided with a single-shot caudal block. Blockade of the ilioinguinal nerve may lead to additional analgesia. The aim of this double-blind, randomized controlled trial was to evaluate the efficacy of an adjuvant blockade of the ilioinguinal nerve using ultrasound (US) guidance at the end of the procedure with local anesthetic vs normal saline and to explore the potential for prolongation of analgesia with decreased need for postoperative pain medication.Fifty children ages 1-6 years scheduled for unilateral inguinal hernia repair, hydrocelectomy, orchidopexy, or orchiectomy were prospectively randomized into one of two groups: Group S that received an US-guided ilioinguinal nerve block with 0.1 ml x kg(-1) of preservative-free normal saline and Group B that received an US-guided nerve block with 0.1 ml x kg(-1) of 0.25% bupivacaine with 1 : 200,000 epinephrine at the conclusion of the surgery. After induction of anesthesia but prior to surgical incision, all patients received caudal anesthesia with 0.7 ml x kg(-1) of 0.125% bupivacaine with 1 : 200,000 epinephrine. Patients were observed by a blinded observer for (i) pain scores using the Children and Infants Postoperative Pain Scale, (ii) need for rescue medication in the PACU, (iii) need for oral pain medications given by the parents at home.Forty-eight patients, consisting of 46 males and two females, with a mean age of 3.98 (SD +/- 1.88) were enrolled in the study. Two patients were excluded from the study because of study protocol violation and/or alteration in surgical procedure. The average pain scores reported for the entire duration spent in the recovery room for the caudal and caudal/ilioinguinal block groups were 1.92 (SD +/- 1.59) and 1.18 (SD +/- 1.31), respectively. The average pain score difference was 0.72 (SD +/- 0.58) and was statistically significant (P < 0.05). In addition, when examined by procedure type, it was found that the difference in the average pain scores between the caudal and caudal/ilioinguinal block groups was statistically significant for the inguinal hernia repair patients (P < 0.05) but not for the other groin surgery patients (P = 0.13). For all groin surgery patients, six of the 23 patients in the caudal group and eight of the 25 patients in the caudal/ilioinguinal block group required pain rescue medications throughout their entire hospital stay or at home (P = 0.76). Overall, the caudal group received an average of 0.54 (SD +/- 1.14) pain rescue medication doses, while the caudal/ilioinguinal block group received an average of 0.77 (SD +/- 1.70) pain rescue medication doses; this was, however, not statistically significant (P = 0.58).The addition of an US-guided ilioinguinal nerve block to a single-shot caudal block decreases the severity of pain experienced by pediatric groin surgery patients. The decrease in pain scores were particularly pronounced in inguinal hernia repair patients.Epidural catheter placement in children: comparing a novel approach using ultrasound guidance and a standard loss-of-resistance technique.We report a prospective, randomized study to evaluate ultrasound guidance for epidural catheter placement in children 0-6 yr of age.Epidural catheters were placed at lumbar or thoracic cord levels in 64 children undergoing major surgery, using either ultrasonography or loss-of-resistance (LOR) for guidance. Using a 5-10 MHz linear ultrasound probe, the neuraxial structures were identified, the skin-epidural depth and epidural space was measured, the advancing epidural catheter visualized, and the spread of local anaesthetic verifying catheter position was confirmed. Epidural placement procedures were analysed for bone contacts and speed of execution. Children under 6 months were analysed separately.Epidural placement involved bone contacts in 17% of children in the ultrasound group and 71% of children in the LOR group (P<0.0001). Epidurals were executed more swiftly in the ultrasound group [162 (75) s vs 234 (138) s; P<0.01]. Children under 6 months revealed a 0.9 correlation between skin-epidural depth and body weight.Ultrasonography is a useful aid to verify epidural placement of local anaesthetic agents and epidural catheters in children. Advantages include a reduction in bone contacts, faster epidural placement, direct visualization of neuraxial structures and the spread of local anaesthetic inside the epidural space. Ultrasound guidance requires additional training and good manual skills, and should only be used once experience in ultrasound-guided techniques of regional anaesthesia has been acquired.Ultrasonography-guided bilateral rectus sheath block vs local anesthetic infiltration after pediatric umbilical hernia repair: a prospective randomized clinical trial.Regional anesthetic techniques can be used to alleviate postoperative pain in children undergoing pediatric surgical procedures. Use of ultrasonographic guidance for bilateral rectus sheath block (BRSB) has been shown to improve immediate pain scores and reduce use of postoperative analgesia in the postanesthesia care unit (PACU).To compare efficacy of ultrasonography-guided BRSB and local anesthetic infiltration (LAI) in providing postoperative analgesia after pediatric umbilical hernia repair.Prospective, observer-blinded, randomized clinical trial.Tertiary-referral urban children's hospital.Eligible children 3 to 12 years of age undergoing elective umbilical hernia repair from November 16, 2009, through May 31, 2011.Ropivacaine hydrochloride administered at the conclusion of surgery as LAI by the surgeon (n = 25) or as ultrasonography-guided BRSB by the anesthesiologist (n = 27).Scores on the FACES Pain Rating Scale measured at 10-minute intervals and all use of analgesic medications in the PACU.Median FACES scores in the PACU were lower in the BRSB group compared with the LAI group at 10 minutes (0 vs 1; P = .04), 30 minutes (0 vs 1; P = .01), and 40 minutes or later (0 vs 1; P = .03). Fewer doses of opioid and nonopioid medications were given to the BRSB group compared with the LAI group (5 vs 11 doses for opioids; 5 vs 10 for nonopioids).In the PACU, ultrasonography-guided BRSB after umbilical hernia repair in children is associated with lower median FACES scores and decreased use of opioid and nonopioid medications compared with LAI. Future studies could examine the use of longer-acting anesthetic agents with ultrasonography-guided BRSB.clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01015053.Efficacy of 2 Regional Pain Control Techniques in Pediatric Foot Surgery.Peripheral nerve blocks (PNBs) have the potential to reduce postoperative pain. The use of ultrasound (US) to guide PNBs may be more beneficial than nerve stimulation (NS); however, very few studies have studied this technique in children. The objective of this study was to compare postoperative pain control in pediatric patients who had general anesthesia (GA) alone compared with those who had PNB performed by NS, or PNB with both NS and US guidance. Our hypothesis was that compared with NS, the US-guided PNB would result in reduced postoperative pain and opioid use, and that both PNB conditions would have improved outcomes compared with GA.A retrospective chart review of foot and ankle surgery included 103 patients who were stratified into 3 groups: GA, PNB with NS, and PNB with NS and US. Pain levels were measured with visual pain scales at 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 hours postoperatively. Days of hospitalization, morphine and oxycodone use by weight, and time to first PRN opioid use were also recorded. A repeated measure analysis of variance was used to compare the groups, and the proportion of patients who reported a visual analog scale score of 0 was calculated for each time point.There were no significant differences in pain levels between groups for the first 12 hours, but the US group had higher pain levels at 24 hours. Both US and NS groups had a longer time to PRN opioid use and used significantly less morphine compared with GA. The US group had a significantly greater proportion of pain-free patients than the other 2 groups for the first 6 hours.The use of US guidance is beneficial in postoperative pain control. Both US-guided and NS-guided PNB are preferable to GA alone for lower extremity orthopaedic surgery in the pediatric population.III, retrospective comparative study.Ultrasound-guided transversus abdominis plane block in children: a randomised comparison with wound infiltration.The transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block is a new regional anaesthesia technique applicable to infants and children.The present study was designed to evaluate the analgesic efficacy of ultrasound-guided TAP block with high volume local anaesthetic (0.5 ml kg) during the first 24 h after surgery in children undergoing inguinal hernia repair.Randomised comparative study.Gaziantep University Hospital between December 2010 and May 2011.Fifty-seven children between 2 and 8 years of age undergoing unilateral inguinal hernia repair were randomised to TAP block (group T, n = 29) or to wound infiltration (group C, n = 28).A TAP block using ultrasound guidance with 0.25% levobupivacaine 0.5 ml kg(-1) or wound infiltration with 0.2 ml kg(-1) 0.25% levobupivacaine, was performed on the same side as the hernia under general anaesthesia.Time to first analgesic, cumulative number of doses of analgesic, pain scores and adverse effects were assessed over the course of 24 h.The time to first analgesic (mean ± SD) was significantly longer in group T than in group C (17 ± 6.8 vs. 4.7 ± 1.6 h, respectively; P < 0.001). Thirteen (45%) patients in group T did not require any analgesic within the first 24 h. The cumulative number of doses of analgesic was significantly lower in group T than in group C (1.3 ± 1.2 vs. 3.6 ± 0.7, respectively, P < 0.001). Pain scores were significantly different between the groups at all time points except at 1, 20 and 24 h (P < 0.001).Ultrasound-guided TAP block with high volume (0.5 ml kg) 0.25% levobupivacaine provides prolonged postoperative analgesia and reduced analgesic use without any clinical side-effects after unilateral hernia repair in children.ACTRN12611000585921 (7/06/2011) from Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry.Ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block or wound infiltration in children: a randomized blinded study of analgesia and bupivacaine absorption.Rectus sheath block can provide analgesia following umbilical hernia repair. However, conflicting reports on its analgesic effectiveness exist. No study has investigated plasma local anesthetic concentration following ultrasound-guided rectus sheath block (USGRSB) in children.Compare the effectiveness and bupivacaine absorption following USGRSB or wound infiltration (WI) for umbilical hernia repair in children.A randomized blinded study comparing WI with USGRSB in 40 children undergoing umbilical hernia repair was performed. Group WI (n = 20) received wound infiltration 1 mg·kg(-1) 0.25% bupivacaine. Group RS (n = 20) received USGRSB 0.5 mg·kg(-1) 0.25% bupivacaine per side in the posterior rectus sheath compartment. Pain scores and rescue analgesia were recorded. Blood samples were drawn at 0, 10, 20, 30, 45, and 60 min.Patients in the WI group had a twofold increased risk of requiring morphine (hazard ratio 2.06, 95% CI 1.01, 4.20, P = 0.05). When required, median time to first morphine dose was longer in the USGRSB group (65.5 min vs. 47.5 min, P = 0.049). Peak plasma bupivacaine concentration was higher following USGRSB than WI (median: 631.9 ng·ml(-1) IQR: 553.9-784.1 vs. 389.7 ng·ml(-1) IQR: 250.5-502.7, P = 0.002). Tmax was longer in the USGRSB group (median 45 min IQR: 30-60 vs. 20 min IQR: 20-45, P = 0.006).USGRSB provides more effective analgesia than WI for umbilical hernia repair. USGRSB with 1 mg·kg(-1) 0.25% bupivacaine is associated with safe plasma bupivacaine concentration that peaks higher and later than WI. Caution against using larger volumes of higher concentration local anesthetic for USGRSB is advised.Ultrasonographic guidance for sciatic and femoral nerve blocks in children.Recent studies have shown that ultrasound guidance for paediatric regional anaesthesia can improve the quality of upper extremity and neuraxial blocks. We therefore investigated whether ultrasound guidance for sciatic and femoral nerve blocks prolongs sensory blockade in comparison with nerve stimulator guidance in children.Forty-six children scheduled for surgery of one lower extremity were randomized to receive a sciatic and femoral nerve block under either ultrasound or nerve stimulator guidance. After induction of general anaesthesia, the blocks were performed using an ultrasound-guided multiple injection technique until the nerves were surrounded by levobupivacaine, or by nerve stimulator guidance using a predefined dose of 0.3 ml kg(-1) of levobupivacaine. An increase in heart rate of more than 15% of baseline during surgery defined a failed block. The duration of the block was determined from the injection of local anaesthetic to the time when the patient received the first postoperative analgesic.Two blocks in the nerve stimulator group failed. There were no failures in the ultrasound group. The duration of analgesia was longer in the ultrasound group mean (sd) 508 (178) vs 335 (169) min (P < 0.05). The volume of local anaesthetic in sciatic and femoral nerve blocks was reduced with ultrasound compared with nerve stimulator guidance [0.2 (0.06) vs 0.3 ml kg(-1) (P < 0.001) and 0.15 (0.04) vs 0.3 ml kg(-1) (P < 0.001), respectively].Ultrasound guidance for sciatic and femoral nerve blocks in children increased the duration of sensory blockade in comparison with nerve stimulator guidance. Prolonged sensory blockade was achieved with smaller volumes of local anaesthetic when using ultrasound guidance.Comparison of caudal epidural block and ultrasonography-guided transversus abdominis plane block for pain relief in children undergoing lower abdominal surgery.We conducted this study to compare the efficacy of caudal epidural block (CEB) vs ultrasonography-guided transversus abdominis plane (TAP) block for providing postoperative pain relief in children scheduled for lower abdominal surgery. Whereas the primary objective was to compare the duration of postoperative analgesia, the secondary objectives included comparative assessment (TAP vs CEB) of quality of pain relief in the first 24hours postoperatively and rescue analgesia requirements.Randomized-control, prospective, observer-blinded, 2-arm, single-center comparison.Operating room, postoperative recovery area.Eighty-children, aged 2-6years, of American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status I/II scheduled to undergo unilateral lower abdominal surgery under general anesthesia.The recruited children were randomly allocated to receive under general anesthesia either CEB (group C, 0.75 mL/kg of 0.25% bupivacaine) or ultrasonography-guided administration of TAP block (group T, 0.5 mL/kg of 0.25% bupivacaine).Intraoperative: heart rate and noninvasive blood pressure; postoperative: pain profile, including duration of postoperative analgesia, quality of pain relief, and rescue analgesia requirements.The median duration of postoperative analgesia was significantly greater in children who received CEB than those who were administered TAP block (group C: 362.5 minutes [172.5-693.75] vs group T: 210 minutes [108.75-362.5]; P<.05). No difference was found in the incidence of postoperative pain up to 6 hours from the point of initiation of assessment (group C: 47.2% vs group T: 55.9%; P>.05). The children who received CEB experienced greater incidence of pain in the 6- to 24-hour postoperative interval than those administered TAP block (group C: 75% vs group T: 44.1%; P<.05). Although there was no difference in the rescue analgesia requirements, the number of children not requiring any rescue analgesia in the first 24 hours postoperatively was significantly higher in the TAP group (group C: n=2 vs group T: n=8; P<.05).In children undergoing lower abdominal surgery, CEB provides a significantly prolonged duration of postoperative analgesia when compared with ultrasonography-guided TAP block.Dorsal penile nerve block for male pediatric circumcision--randomized comparison of ultrasound-guided vs anatomical landmark technique.Dorsal penile nerve block (DPNB) is a commonly performed regional anesthetic technique for male circumcision. Traditionally, DPNB is based on an anatomical landmark technique. Recently, an ultrasound-guided technique for DPNB has been described.The aim of our study was to compare the anatomical landmark technique with this ultrasound-guided technique. The hypothesis to be tested was that ultrasound guidance of DPNB would lead to less administration of opioid when compared to the anatomical landmark technique.Boys of ASA status I/II scheduled for day case circumcision were prospectively recruited and randomized. DPNB was performed under general anesthesia using the anatomical landmark technique or ultrasound guidance. Fentanyl was administered intraoperatively and immediately postoperatively if patients demonstrated signs of pain. Similarly, oral codeine was given prior to discharge if required. The primary outcome measure was the number of patients requiring fentanyl. Secondary outcome measures included initial pain score on emergence from general anesthesia, requirement for codeine predischarge, and time to perform block.A total of 32 patients were recruited to the landmark group and 34 to the ultrasound group. There was no significant difference between the two groups in terms of fentanyl administration. The ultrasound technique took longer to perform but was associated with a reduction in codeine requirement prior to discharge.This study does not support the routine use of ultrasound for the performance of DPNB in male pediatric circumcision. Nonetheless, an associated reduction in codeine administration postoperatively suggests some benefit in terms of postoperative pain.Ultrasound-guided ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric nerve blocks versus caudal block for postoperative analgesia in children undergoing unilateral groin surgery.Ultrasound (US) guidance is strongly recommended when performing peripheral nerve blocks in infants and children.To assess whether US-guided ilioinguinal/iliohypogastric (II/IH) nerve blocks with local anesthetic (LA) would provide comparable postoperative analgesia to blind technique caudal block with LA following pediatric unilateral groin surgery. Secondary endpoints included analgesic consumption, parental satisfaction, and postoperative complications.Prospective, crossover randomized controlled trial performed on children undergoing unilateral groin surgery.Fifty children aged 1-6 years scheduled for unilateral groin surgery were included in the study. After induction of general anesthesia and prior to surgical incision, patients were prospectively randomized into one of two groups: Group B received US-guided II/IH nerve blocks with 0.1 ml.kg(-1) of 0.25% bupivacaine and Group C received a caudal blockade with 0.7 ml.kg(-1) of 0.25% bupivacaine. Patients were assessed in the recovery room, the day-stay unit and for 24 h at home for pain score, analgesic consumption, and parental satisfaction.Arithmetic mean and standard deviation values were calculated and statistical analyses were performed for each group. Independent sample t-test was used to compare continuous variables exhibiting normal distribution, and Chi-squared test or Fisher exact test for non-continuous variables. P<0.05 was considered significant.The average pain scores during hospital stay were 1.82±1.71and 1.52±1.41 for group C and group B respectively (P>0.05). The average time to first rescue analgesia was longer in group B 253±102.6 min as compared to 219.6±48.4 min in group C. In recovery room, four patients in group C required pain rescue medication compared to five patients in group B (P>0.05). Similarly eight patients in the group C and six patients in group B required pain rescue medication at day-stay unit or at home (P>0.05). Group C received 0.74 pain rescue medication doses (range 0-8), while group B received 0.65 pain rescue medication doses (range 0-6) at hospital and at home (P>0.05).US-guided II/IH nerve blocks is an ideal postoperative analgesic for unilateral groin surgery in children, particularly hernia repairs and is as effective as caudal block, with a lower volume of local anesthetics.Does ultrasound guidance improve the success rate of infraclavicular brachial plexus block when compared with nerve stimulation in children with radial club hands?The classical response to nerve stimulation may be altered in cases of radial club hand. Ultrasound guidance may prove to be a useful tool in such situations. In this study, we compared the success rate of ultrasound-guided infraclavicular brachial plexus block with nerve stimulation for children undergoing radial club hand repair.Fifty children, aged 1-2 yr, undergoing radial club hand repair were randomly assigned to receive infraclavicular brachial plexus block guided by nerve stimulator (Group NS) or ultrasound (Group U) in combination with light general anesthetic. Bupivacaine 0.5 mL/kg of 0.5% was injected in both groups. Pain response to surgical stimulus was considered as block failure. The Children's Hospital Eastern Ontario Pain Scale pain score was recorded at 1, 4, 6, 8, and 10 postoperative hours.In Group NS, the blocks were successful in 16 of 25 patients (64%), whereas in Group U, 24 of 25 patients had successful blocks (P = 0.0053). There was no difference in the time to first analgesia or analgesic consumption in the 10-h study period.Ultrasound-guided infraclavicular brachial plexus block improves the success rate in patients with radial club hands when compared with nerve stimulation in patients undergoing radial club hand correction.