Implantable telescope for end-stage age-related macular degeneration: long-term visual acuity and safety outcomes.To evaluate long-term safety and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) results of a telescope prosthesis in patients with end-stage age-related macular degeneration (AMD).Prospective, open-label clinical trial with fellow-eye controls.Patients with end-stage AMD (bilateral geographic atrophy or disciform scars; BCVA, 20/80 to 20/800) received the telescope prosthesis at 28 centers. Methods were similar to those described in the one-year results, with follow-up visits continuing at 18 and 24 months. Main outcome measures included BCVA change from baseline, endothelial cell density (ECD) and morphometry, and incidence of complications.At two years, data from 174 (92.6%) of 188 available patients were analyzed. Overall, 103 (59.5%) of 173 telescope-implanted eyes gained three lines or more (doubling of visual angle) of BCVA compared with 18 (10.3%) of 174 fellow control eyes (P < .0001). Mean BCVA improved 3.6 lines (standard deviation [SD], 1.9 lines) and 2.8 lines (SD, 2.3 lines) from baseline in eyes with the 3X and 2.2X device models, respectively. Mean ECD stabilized through two years, with 2.4% mean cell loss occurring from one to two years. There was no significant change in coefficient of variation or percentage of hexagonal endothelial cells from within six months to two years after surgery. The most common complication was inflammatory deposits.Long-term results of this telescope prosthesis show the substantial BCVA improvement at one year is maintained at two years. Key indicators of corneal health demonstrate ECD change that reflects remodeling of the endothelium associated with the implantation procedure. ECD stabilizes over time, and there is no evidence of any ongoing endothelial trauma.A prospective multicenter clinical trial to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the implantable miniature telescope.To evaluate the safety and preliminary efficacy of a novel visual prosthetic device, the Implantable Miniature Telescope, IMT (by Dr Isaac Lipshitz) (IMT), in a phase I trial in patients with significant bilateral central vision impairment from late-stage age-related macular degeneration (AMD). The IMT is designed to reduce the relative size of the scotoma by rendering enlarged (threefold) central visual field images over the central and peripheral retina.Prospective, multicenter, open-label clinical trial.In this prospective, multicenter phase I trial, 14 patients aged 60 or older with bilateral geographic atrophy or disciform scar AMD, cataract, and best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) between 20/80 and 20/400 had an IMT implanted in one eye. Distance and near BCVA, endothelial cell density, and quality of life, measured as activities of daily life (ADL), were evaluated preoperatively and postoperatively.At 12 months, 10 (77%) of 13 patients gained 2 more lines of either distance or near BCVA, and eight (62%) of 13 patients gained 3 or more lines in either distance or near BCVA. Mean endothelial cell density decreased by 13%. All adverse events resolved without sequelae. ADL scores improved in the majority of patients.The results of this phase I trial support further evaluation of the IMT in a larger study population with late-stage AMD. A phase II/III trial is in progress.Comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the implantable miniature telescope.To assess the preference-based comparative effectiveness (human value gain) and the cost-utility (cost-effectiveness) of a telescope prosthesis (implantable miniature telescope) for the treatment of end-stage, age-related macular degeneration (AMD).A value-based medicine, second-eye model, cost-utility analysis was performed to quantify the comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of therapy with the telescope prosthesis.Published, evidence-based data from the IMT002 Study Group clinical trial. Ophthalmic utilities were obtained from a validated cohort of >1000 patients with ocular diseases.Comparative effectiveness data were converted from visual acuity to utility (value-based) format. The incremental costs (Medicare) of therapy versus no therapy were integrated with the value gain conferred by the telescope prosthesis to assess its average cost-utility. The incremental value gains and incremental costs of therapy referent to (1) a fellow eye cohort and (2) a fellow eye cohort of those who underwent intra-study cataract surgery were integrated in incremental cost-utility analyses. All value outcomes and costs were discounted at a 3% annual rate, as per the Panel on Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine.Comparative effectiveness was quantified using the (1) quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gain and (2) percent human value gain (improvement in quality of life). The QALY gain was integrated with incremental costs into the cost-utility ratio ($/QALY, or US dollars expended per QALY gained).The mean, discounted QALY gain associated with use of the telescope prosthesis over 12 years was 0.7577. When the QALY loss of 0.0004 attributable to the adverse events was factored into the model, the final QALY gain was 0.7573. This resulted in a 12.5% quality of life gain for the average patient during the 12 years of the model. The average cost-utility versus no therapy for use of the telescope prosthesis was $14389/QALY. The incremental cost-utility referent to control fellow eyes was $14063/QALY, whereas the incremental cost-utility referent to fellow eyes that underwent intra-study cataract surgery was $11805/QALY.Therapy with the telescope prosthesis considerably improves quality of life and at the same time is cost-effective by conventional standards.Implantable miniature telescope for the treatment of visual acuity loss resulting from end-stage age-related macular degeneration: 1-year results.To evaluate the safety and efficacy of an implantable visual prosthetic device (IMT; VisionCare Ophthalmic Technologies, Saratoga, CA) in patients with bilateral, end-stage age-related macular degeneration (AMD).Prospective, open-label, multicenter clinical trial with fellow eye controls.A total of 217 patients (mean age, 76 years) with AMD and moderate to profound bilateral central visual acuity loss (20/80-20/800) resulting from bilateral untreatable geographic atrophy, disciform scars, or both were enrolled.A visual prosthetic device (implantable telescope), designed to enlarge retinal images of the central visual field, was implanted monocularly in the capsular bag after lens extraction. Fellow eyes were not implanted to provide peripheral vision and served as controls. Study patients participated in 6 visual rehabilitation visits after surgery.Best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) and best-corrected near visual acuity (BCNVA), quality-of-life scores from the National Eye Institute 25-item Visual Function Questionnaire (NEI VFQ-25) and the Activities of Daily Life scale, endothelial cell density (ECD), and incidence of complications and adverse events.At 1 year, 67% of implanted eyes achieved a 3-line or more improvement in BCDVA versus 13% of fellow eye controls (P<0.0001). Fifty-three percent of implanted eyes achieved a 3-line or more improvement in both BCDVA and BCNVA versus 10% of fellow eyes (P<0.0001). Mean BCDVA and BCNVA improved 3.5 lines and 3.2 lines, respectively, in implanted eyes versus 0.8 lines and 1.8 lines, respectively, in fellow eyes (P<0.0001). Change in visual acuity was not related to lesion type. Mean NEI VFQ-25 scores improved by more than 7 points from baseline (P<0.01) on 7 of 8 relevant subscales. Eleven eyes did not receive the device because of an aborted procedure. Endothelial cell density was reduced by 20% at 3 months and 25% at 1 year. The decrease in ECD was correlated with postsurgical edema (P<0.0001), and there was no evidence that endothelial cell loss is accelerated by ongoing endothelial trauma after implantation.This implantable visual prosthesis can improve visual acuity and quality of life in patients with moderate to profound visual impairment caused by bilateral, end-stage AMD.