Is long-term prognosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration predictable by neuroimaging? Evidence from a single-subject functional brain study.Prediction of survival in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is guesswork. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether SPECT scan may be useful to predict prognosis of long term survival in FTLD patients. A cohort of 125 patients with FTLD who underwent brain SPECT scan at the time of enrollment and who were further followed up for at least one year were considered. In each subject, volume of interests (VOIs) covering frontotemporal and parietal regions, bilaterally, were drawn. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied on VOIs, and a Cox regression model was carried out to find out best predictors of survival. A two-pattern PCA solution was chosen, explaining more than 70% of variance, and "frontal" PC1 and "temporal" PC2 components were identified. The frontal PC1 was associated with higher rate of faster progression (HR = 2.06, 95% CI = 1.23-3.44, p = 0.006 for univariate model, and HR = 1.85, 95% CI = 1.04-3.28, p = 0.03 for multivariate model). In particular, right orbitofrontal cortex showed the higher loadings in PC1; the worse the scores of this region the shorter the survival was reported. We suggest that SPECT imaging, beyond a helpful tool in diagnostic assessment, may be an easily and accessible marker of disease outcome in FTLD. Further studies considering structural neuroimaging are warranted.Characterization of frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.Numerous kindreds with familial frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have been linked to chromosome 9, and an expansion of the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 has recently been identified as the pathogenic mechanism. We describe the key characteristics in the probands and their affected relatives who have been evaluated at Mayo Clinic Rochester or Mayo Clinic Florida in whom the hexanucleotide repeat expansion were found. Forty-three probands and 10 of their affected relatives with DNA available (total 53 subjects) were shown to carry the hexanucleotide repeat expansion. Thirty-six (84%) of the 43 probands had a familial disorder, whereas seven (16%) appeared to be sporadic. Among examined subjects from the 43 families (n = 63), the age of onset ranged from 33 to 72 years (median 52 years) and survival ranged from 1 to 17 years, with the age of onset <40 years in six (10%) and >60 in 19 (30%). Clinical diagnoses among examined subjects included behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia with or without parkinsonism (n = 30), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 18), frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without parkinsonism (n = 12), and other various syndromes (n = 3). Parkinsonism was present in 35% of examined subjects, all of whom had behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as the dominant clinical phenotype. No subject with a diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia was identified with this mutation. Incomplete penetrance was suggested in two kindreds, and the youngest generation had significantly earlier age of onset (>10 years) compared with the next oldest generation in 11 kindreds. Neuropsychological testing showed a profile of slowed processing speed, complex attention/executive dysfunction, and impairment in rapid word retrieval. Neuroimaging studies showed bilateral frontal abnormalities most consistently, with more variable degrees of parietal with or without temporal changes; no case had strikingly focal or asymmetric findings. Neuropathological examination of 14 patients revealed a range of transactive response DNA binding protein molecular weight 43 pathology (10 type A and four type B), as well as ubiquitin-positive cerebellar granular neuron inclusions in all but one case. Motor neuron degeneration was detected in nine patients, including five patients without ante-mortem signs of motor neuron disease. While variability exists, most cases with this mutation have a characteristic spectrum of demographic, clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and especially neuropathological findings.Episodic memory impairment in frontotemporal dementia; a ⁹⁹mTc- HMPAO SPECT study.Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are the most common types of dementia in the presenile population. Episodic memory impairment, the clinical hallmark of AD, can also be encountered in patients with FTD, complicating accurate diagnosis. Several studies in FTD have correlated memory deficits with neuroimaging findings, but lacked to compare neuroimaging results in FTD patients with and without memory impairment, while this latter analysis may give us insight into the underlying mechanisms of memory impairment in FTD. The aim of the present study was to compare (99m)Tc-HMPAO SPECT hypoperfusion patterns between FTD with episodic memory impairment (n = 13), FTD patients without episodic memory impairment (n = 10) as well as early onset (< 70 yrs) AD patients (n = 13), and controls (n = 15). We performed our analyses by means of Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5), and showed that FTD patients with episodic memory impairment had lower perfusion in the right temporal lobe compared with FTD patients without memory impairment. Lower perfusion in this region correlated with worse memory performance on the Clinical Dementia Rating scale in FTD patients. With equal performances on memory tests, patients with early onset AD showed posterior temporal and parietal lobe hypoperfusion in comparison with patients with FTD and memory impairment, while vice versa hypoperfusion in the anterior frontotemporal regions was found in FTD patients with memory impairment in comparison with AD.Is long-term prognosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration predictable by neuroimaging? Evidence from a single-subject functional brain study.Prediction of survival in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is guesswork. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether SPECT scan may be useful to predict prognosis of long term survival in FTLD patients. A cohort of 125 patients with FTLD who underwent brain SPECT scan at the time of enrollment and who were further followed up for at least one year were considered. In each subject, volume of interests (VOIs) covering frontotemporal and parietal regions, bilaterally, were drawn. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied on VOIs, and a Cox regression model was carried out to find out best predictors of survival. A two-pattern PCA solution was chosen, explaining more than 70% of variance, and "frontal" PC1 and "temporal" PC2 components were identified. The frontal PC1 was associated with higher rate of faster progression (HR = 2.06, 95% CI = 1.23-3.44, p = 0.006 for univariate model, and HR = 1.85, 95% CI = 1.04-3.28, p = 0.03 for multivariate model). In particular, right orbitofrontal cortex showed the higher loadings in PC1; the worse the scores of this region the shorter the survival was reported. We suggest that SPECT imaging, beyond a helpful tool in diagnostic assessment, may be an easily and accessible marker of disease outcome in FTLD. Further studies considering structural neuroimaging are warranted.Characterization of frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.Numerous kindreds with familial frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have been linked to chromosome 9, and an expansion of the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 has recently been identified as the pathogenic mechanism. We describe the key characteristics in the probands and their affected relatives who have been evaluated at Mayo Clinic Rochester or Mayo Clinic Florida in whom the hexanucleotide repeat expansion were found. Forty-three probands and 10 of their affected relatives with DNA available (total 53 subjects) were shown to carry the hexanucleotide repeat expansion. Thirty-six (84%) of the 43 probands had a familial disorder, whereas seven (16%) appeared to be sporadic. Among examined subjects from the 43 families (n = 63), the age of onset ranged from 33 to 72 years (median 52 years) and survival ranged from 1 to 17 years, with the age of onset <40 years in six (10%) and >60 in 19 (30%). Clinical diagnoses among examined subjects included behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia with or without parkinsonism (n = 30), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 18), frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without parkinsonism (n = 12), and other various syndromes (n = 3). Parkinsonism was present in 35% of examined subjects, all of whom had behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as the dominant clinical phenotype. No subject with a diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia was identified with this mutation. Incomplete penetrance was suggested in two kindreds, and the youngest generation had significantly earlier age of onset (>10 years) compared with the next oldest generation in 11 kindreds. Neuropsychological testing showed a profile of slowed processing speed, complex attention/executive dysfunction, and impairment in rapid word retrieval. Neuroimaging studies showed bilateral frontal abnormalities most consistently, with more variable degrees of parietal with or without temporal changes; no case had strikingly focal or asymmetric findings. Neuropathological examination of 14 patients revealed a range of transactive response DNA binding protein molecular weight 43 pathology (10 type A and four type B), as well as ubiquitin-positive cerebellar granular neuron inclusions in all but one case. Motor neuron degeneration was detected in nine patients, including five patients without ante-mortem signs of motor neuron disease. While variability exists, most cases with this mutation have a characteristic spectrum of demographic, clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and especially neuropathological findings.Contribution of single photon emission computed tomography to the differential diagnosis of dementia in a memory clinic.To evaluate the contribution of single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) to the differential diagnosis of dementia, we studied 48 consecutive patients (median age: 63) with a degenerative or vascular dementia, a 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT imaging, and a diagnostic confirmation (autopsy or genetic mutation). The SPECT scans were visually rated by two nuclear medicine physicians (first blinded to the clinical data, then with the data). Comparisons between clinical diagnoses and/or SPECT imaging and neuropathology were performed. At the time of SPECT was performed, the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) sensitivity was 83%, specificity was 76%, and diagnostic accuracy was 79%. The blinded SPECT sensitivity was 57%, specificity 92%, and diagnostic accuracy 75%. The SPECT associated with clinical data sensitivity was 65%, specificity 84%, and accuracy 75%. The clinical diagnosis of frontotemporal-lobar degeneration (FTLD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and corticobasal degeneration syndrome (CBDs) sensitivity was 83%, specificity 87%, and accuracy 85%. The blinded SPECT sensitivity was 50%, specificity 97%, and accuracy 79%. The SPECT associated with clinical data sensitivity was 61%, specificity was 93%, and accuracy 81%. Whenever the blinded SPECT interpretation agreed with the clinical diagnosis of AD and FTLD/PSP/CBDs, the condition was confirmed by neuropathological assessment in all cases. Compared with clinical diagnosis alone, SPECT imaging improved the specificity of the etiological diagnosis in degenerative dementia, although its sensitivity was not as good as that of clinical diagnosis. For AD and FTLD/PSP/CBDs, agreement between the clinical and SPECT-based diagnoses was always confirmed by neuropathological assessment.Perfusion SPECT studies with mapping of Brodmann areas in differentiating Alzheimer's disease from frontotemporal degeneration syndromes.The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of brain perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) studies with mapping of Brodmann areas (BAs) in the differential diagnosis between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal degeneration (FTLD) syndromes.Thirty-nine patients with AD and 73 patients with FTLD syndromes [behavioural variant FTLD (bvFTLD); language variant FTLD (lvFTLD), including semantic dementia (SD) and progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA); and corticobasal degeneration (CBD)/progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) syndromes] underwent brain perfusion SPECT. The NeuroGam software was used for the semiquantitative evaluation of perfusion in BAs of the left (L) and right (R) hemispheres.Compared with those in AD patients, BAs with statistically significant hypoperfusion were found in the prefrontal, orbitofrontal and cingulated cortices and Broca's areas of FTLD and bvFTLD patients; in the temporal and prefrontal cortices and Broca's areas of lvFTLD patients; in the left temporal gyrus of SD patients; in premotor and supplementary motor, prefrontal, orbitofrontal, temporal and anterior cingulated cortices and Broca's areas of PNFA patients; and in the prefrontal, temporal, posterior cingulated and primary and secondary visual cortices of CBD/PSP patients. BA 46R could differentiate AD patients from FTLD and bvFTLD patients; 21L and 25L were found to be independent predictors for lvFTLD in comparison with AD, and 25R, 21L and 23R could differentiate AD patients from PNFA, SD and CBD/PSP patients, respectively.Brain perfusion SPECT with BA mapping in AD and FTLD patients could improve the definition of brain areas that are specifically implicated in these disorders, resulting in a more accurate differential diagnosis.Value of neuropsychological testing, imaging, and CSF biomarkers for the differential diagnosis and prognosis of clinically ambiguous dementia.The objective of this study was to examine the diagnostic accuracy of imaging and CSF biomarkers in clinically ambiguous dementia (CAD). 69 patients were prospectively followed. The endpoint was clinical diagnosis at follow-up of 24 months based upon existing criteria. Medial temporal lobe atrophy score on MRI, distinctive patterns on 99 mTc-HMPAO-SPECT, and CSF levels of amyloid-β peptide, total tau protein, and P-tau181P were used together with neuropsychological testing to assess Se (sensitivity) and Sp (specificity) of separate and combined markers. 60 patients reached the endpoint. A definite diagnosis was achieved in 48 patients. CSF biomarkers had a Sp of 71% and a Se of 100% for Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis. Sp increased to 88% and 93% when MRI and MRI + SPECT were combined, at the expense of Se. CSF biomarkers levels also provided clues to frontotemporal (FTD) or vascular dementias (VaD) diagnosis when situated in an intermediate range between normal and pathological values. MRI and SPECT contributed mostly to the diagnosis of VaD (Se 88%, Sp 75%) and FTD (Se 73%, Sp 78%), respectively. Initial neuropsychological testing had a poor diagnostic accuracy, except for a neuropsychiatric inventory score >40 for the diagnosis of FTD (Se 73%, Sp 84%). Independent of the clinical diagnosis, medial temporal lobe atrophy and total-tau were best correlated with cognitive decline at 2 years. In conclusion, CSF biomarkers efficiently predict evolution toward an AD phenotype in CAD. Imaging biomarkers mostly contribute to the differential diagnosis between non-AD dementias. Initial neuropsychological testing was poorly contributive in CAD diagnosis.Episodic memory impairment in frontotemporal dementia; a ⁹⁹mTc- HMPAO SPECT study.Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are the most common types of dementia in the presenile population. Episodic memory impairment, the clinical hallmark of AD, can also be encountered in patients with FTD, complicating accurate diagnosis. Several studies in FTD have correlated memory deficits with neuroimaging findings, but lacked to compare neuroimaging results in FTD patients with and without memory impairment, while this latter analysis may give us insight into the underlying mechanisms of memory impairment in FTD. The aim of the present study was to compare (99m)Tc-HMPAO SPECT hypoperfusion patterns between FTD with episodic memory impairment (n = 13), FTD patients without episodic memory impairment (n = 10) as well as early onset (< 70 yrs) AD patients (n = 13), and controls (n = 15). We performed our analyses by means of Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5), and showed that FTD patients with episodic memory impairment had lower perfusion in the right temporal lobe compared with FTD patients without memory impairment. Lower perfusion in this region correlated with worse memory performance on the Clinical Dementia Rating scale in FTD patients. With equal performances on memory tests, patients with early onset AD showed posterior temporal and parietal lobe hypoperfusion in comparison with patients with FTD and memory impairment, while vice versa hypoperfusion in the anterior frontotemporal regions was found in FTD patients with memory impairment in comparison with AD.Is long-term prognosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration predictable by neuroimaging? Evidence from a single-subject functional brain study.Prediction of survival in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is guesswork. The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether SPECT scan may be useful to predict prognosis of long term survival in FTLD patients. A cohort of 125 patients with FTLD who underwent brain SPECT scan at the time of enrollment and who were further followed up for at least one year were considered. In each subject, volume of interests (VOIs) covering frontotemporal and parietal regions, bilaterally, were drawn. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied on VOIs, and a Cox regression model was carried out to find out best predictors of survival. A two-pattern PCA solution was chosen, explaining more than 70% of variance, and "frontal" PC1 and "temporal" PC2 components were identified. The frontal PC1 was associated with higher rate of faster progression (HR = 2.06, 95% CI = 1.23-3.44, p = 0.006 for univariate model, and HR = 1.85, 95% CI = 1.04-3.28, p = 0.03 for multivariate model). In particular, right orbitofrontal cortex showed the higher loadings in PC1; the worse the scores of this region the shorter the survival was reported. We suggest that SPECT imaging, beyond a helpful tool in diagnostic assessment, may be an easily and accessible marker of disease outcome in FTLD. Further studies considering structural neuroimaging are warranted.Characterization of frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.Numerous kindreds with familial frontotemporal dementia and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have been linked to chromosome 9, and an expansion of the GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat in the non-coding region of chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 has recently been identified as the pathogenic mechanism. We describe the key characteristics in the probands and their affected relatives who have been evaluated at Mayo Clinic Rochester or Mayo Clinic Florida in whom the hexanucleotide repeat expansion were found. Forty-three probands and 10 of their affected relatives with DNA available (total 53 subjects) were shown to carry the hexanucleotide repeat expansion. Thirty-six (84%) of the 43 probands had a familial disorder, whereas seven (16%) appeared to be sporadic. Among examined subjects from the 43 families (n = 63), the age of onset ranged from 33 to 72 years (median 52 years) and survival ranged from 1 to 17 years, with the age of onset <40 years in six (10%) and >60 in 19 (30%). Clinical diagnoses among examined subjects included behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia with or without parkinsonism (n = 30), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (n = 18), frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without parkinsonism (n = 12), and other various syndromes (n = 3). Parkinsonism was present in 35% of examined subjects, all of whom had behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia or frontotemporal dementia/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis as the dominant clinical phenotype. No subject with a diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia was identified with this mutation. Incomplete penetrance was suggested in two kindreds, and the youngest generation had significantly earlier age of onset (>10 years) compared with the next oldest generation in 11 kindreds. Neuropsychological testing showed a profile of slowed processing speed, complex attention/executive dysfunction, and impairment in rapid word retrieval. Neuroimaging studies showed bilateral frontal abnormalities most consistently, with more variable degrees of parietal with or without temporal changes; no case had strikingly focal or asymmetric findings. Neuropathological examination of 14 patients revealed a range of transactive response DNA binding protein molecular weight 43 pathology (10 type A and four type B), as well as ubiquitin-positive cerebellar granular neuron inclusions in all but one case. Motor neuron degeneration was detected in nine patients, including five patients without ante-mortem signs of motor neuron disease. While variability exists, most cases with this mutation have a characteristic spectrum of demographic, clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and especially neuropathological findings.Contribution of single photon emission computed tomography to the differential diagnosis of dementia in a memory clinic.To evaluate the contribution of single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) to the differential diagnosis of dementia, we studied 48 consecutive patients (median age: 63) with a degenerative or vascular dementia, a 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT imaging, and a diagnostic confirmation (autopsy or genetic mutation). The SPECT scans were visually rated by two nuclear medicine physicians (first blinded to the clinical data, then with the data). Comparisons between clinical diagnoses and/or SPECT imaging and neuropathology were performed. At the time of SPECT was performed, the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) sensitivity was 83%, specificity was 76%, and diagnostic accuracy was 79%. The blinded SPECT sensitivity was 57%, specificity 92%, and diagnostic accuracy 75%. The SPECT associated with clinical data sensitivity was 65%, specificity 84%, and accuracy 75%. The clinical diagnosis of frontotemporal-lobar degeneration (FTLD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and corticobasal degeneration syndrome (CBDs) sensitivity was 83%, specificity 87%, and accuracy 85%. The blinded SPECT sensitivity was 50%, specificity 97%, and accuracy 79%. The SPECT associated with clinical data sensitivity was 61%, specificity was 93%, and accuracy 81%. Whenever the blinded SPECT interpretation agreed with the clinical diagnosis of AD and FTLD/PSP/CBDs, the condition was confirmed by neuropathological assessment in all cases. Compared with clinical diagnosis alone, SPECT imaging improved the specificity of the etiological diagnosis in degenerative dementia, although its sensitivity was not as good as that of clinical diagnosis. For AD and FTLD/PSP/CBDs, agreement between the clinical and SPECT-based diagnoses was always confirmed by neuropathological assessment.Perfusion SPECT studies with mapping of Brodmann areas in differentiating Alzheimer's disease from frontotemporal degeneration syndromes.The aim of this study was to evaluate the contribution of brain perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) studies with mapping of Brodmann areas (BAs) in the differential diagnosis between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal degeneration (FTLD) syndromes.Thirty-nine patients with AD and 73 patients with FTLD syndromes [behavioural variant FTLD (bvFTLD); language variant FTLD (lvFTLD), including semantic dementia (SD) and progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA); and corticobasal degeneration (CBD)/progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) syndromes] underwent brain perfusion SPECT. The NeuroGam software was used for the semiquantitative evaluation of perfusion in BAs of the left (L) and right (R) hemispheres.Compared with those in AD patients, BAs with statistically significant hypoperfusion were found in the prefrontal, orbitofrontal and cingulated cortices and Broca's areas of FTLD and bvFTLD patients; in the temporal and prefrontal cortices and Broca's areas of lvFTLD patients; in the left temporal gyrus of SD patients; in premotor and supplementary motor, prefrontal, orbitofrontal, temporal and anterior cingulated cortices and Broca's areas of PNFA patients; and in the prefrontal, temporal, posterior cingulated and primary and secondary visual cortices of CBD/PSP patients. BA 46R could differentiate AD patients from FTLD and bvFTLD patients; 21L and 25L were found to be independent predictors for lvFTLD in comparison with AD, and 25R, 21L and 23R could differentiate AD patients from PNFA, SD and CBD/PSP patients, respectively.Brain perfusion SPECT with BA mapping in AD and FTLD patients could improve the definition of brain areas that are specifically implicated in these disorders, resulting in a more accurate differential diagnosis.Value of neuropsychological testing, imaging, and CSF biomarkers for the differential diagnosis and prognosis of clinically ambiguous dementia.The objective of this study was to examine the diagnostic accuracy of imaging and CSF biomarkers in clinically ambiguous dementia (CAD). 69 patients were prospectively followed. The endpoint was clinical diagnosis at follow-up of 24 months based upon existing criteria. Medial temporal lobe atrophy score on MRI, distinctive patterns on 99 mTc-HMPAO-SPECT, and CSF levels of amyloid-β peptide, total tau protein, and P-tau181P were used together with neuropsychological testing to assess Se (sensitivity) and Sp (specificity) of separate and combined markers. 60 patients reached the endpoint. A definite diagnosis was achieved in 48 patients. CSF biomarkers had a Sp of 71% and a Se of 100% for Alzheimer's disease (AD) diagnosis. Sp increased to 88% and 93% when MRI and MRI + SPECT were combined, at the expense of Se. CSF biomarkers levels also provided clues to frontotemporal (FTD) or vascular dementias (VaD) diagnosis when situated in an intermediate range between normal and pathological values. MRI and SPECT contributed mostly to the diagnosis of VaD (Se 88%, Sp 75%) and FTD (Se 73%, Sp 78%), respectively. Initial neuropsychological testing had a poor diagnostic accuracy, except for a neuropsychiatric inventory score >40 for the diagnosis of FTD (Se 73%, Sp 84%). Independent of the clinical diagnosis, medial temporal lobe atrophy and total-tau were best correlated with cognitive decline at 2 years. In conclusion, CSF biomarkers efficiently predict evolution toward an AD phenotype in CAD. Imaging biomarkers mostly contribute to the differential diagnosis between non-AD dementias. Initial neuropsychological testing was poorly contributive in CAD diagnosis.Episodic memory impairment in frontotemporal dementia; a ⁹⁹mTc- HMPAO SPECT study.Alzheimer's disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are the most common types of dementia in the presenile population. Episodic memory impairment, the clinical hallmark of AD, can also be encountered in patients with FTD, complicating accurate diagnosis. Several studies in FTD have correlated memory deficits with neuroimaging findings, but lacked to compare neuroimaging results in FTD patients with and without memory impairment, while this latter analysis may give us insight into the underlying mechanisms of memory impairment in FTD. The aim of the present study was to compare (99m)Tc-HMPAO SPECT hypoperfusion patterns between FTD with episodic memory impairment (n = 13), FTD patients without episodic memory impairment (n = 10) as well as early onset (< 70 yrs) AD patients (n = 13), and controls (n = 15). We performed our analyses by means of Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5), and showed that FTD patients with episodic memory impairment had lower perfusion in the right temporal lobe compared with FTD patients without memory impairment. Lower perfusion in this region correlated with worse memory performance on the Clinical Dementia Rating scale in FTD patients. With equal performances on memory tests, patients with early onset AD showed posterior temporal and parietal lobe hypoperfusion in comparison with patients with FTD and memory impairment, while vice versa hypoperfusion in the anterior frontotemporal regions was found in FTD patients with memory impairment in comparison with AD.