Sleep in the neurological intensive care unit: feasibility of quantifying sleep after melatonin supplementation with environmental light and noise reduction.Sleep deprivation may be particularly detrimental to intensive care unit (ICU) patients. Polysomnography has demonstrated abnormal sleep in medical and surgical ICU populations. Both environmental factors and circadian disruption have been implicated. We hypothesized that patients in a neurologic ICU would demonstrate similar sleep disturbances and that a combination of sleep-promoting interventions would increase sleep time.Twelve patients were enrolled in this pilot-randomized, controlled, study in a neurologic ICU. For adult patients undergoing continuous EEG for clinical purposes, noise-cancelling headphones and eye masks were worn, and an oral dose of melatonin was administered for 3 days, or until EEG was stopped. Sleep was scored according to standard criteria; EEG was characterized and analyzed quantitatively.Sixty-five percent of the patients' recordings were unscorable based on accepted standardized criteria; therefore, sleep measures could not be compared. For those with sleep that could be scored, total sleep time was normal, although sleep was fragmented and time spent in slow-wave or rapid eye movement sleep was notably decreased. Patients with unscorable recordings had worse injury severity measures, absent or significantly slower posterior dominant rhythm, and less coherence of posterior faster frequencies. Clinical outcomes were similar between intervention and control groups.Although sleep-promoting interventions were feasible, sleep quantification based on currently accepted criteria limited the ability to score sleep. Similar to other ICUs, sleep in the neurologic ICU is abnormal; patients with unscorable sleep-like states have greater injury severity. This study was limited by strict enrollment criteria. A reliable method to quantify sleep and sleep-like states in the ICU is needed.Effect of melatonin on sleep quality of COPD intensive care patients: a pilot study.Sleep deprivation is extremely common in the intensive care unit (ICU), and this lack of sleep is associated with low melatonin secretion. The objective of the current study was to explore the effect of exogenous melatonin administration on sleep quality in patients hospitalized in the pulmonary intensive care unit (ICU). We performed a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in the pulmonary ICU of a tertiary care hospital. Eight adult patients hospitalized in the pulmonary ICU with respiratory failure caused by exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or with pneumonia were studied. Patients received either 3 mg of controlled-release melatonin or a placebo at 22:00, and sleep quality was evaluated by wrist actigraphy. Treatment with controlled-release melatonin dramatically improved both the duration and quality of sleep in this group of patients. Our results suggest that melatonin administration to patients in intensive care units may be indicated as a treatment for sleep induction and resynchronization of the "biologic clock." This treatment may also help in the prevention of the "ICU syndrome" and accelerate the healing process.Melatonin therapy to improve nocturnal sleep in critically ill patients: encouraging results from a small randomised controlled trial.Sleep disturbances are common in critically ill patients and when sleep does occur it traverses the day-night periods. The reduction in plasma melatonin levels and loss of circadian rhythm observed in critically ill patients receiving mechanical ventilation may contribute to this irregular sleep-wake pattern. We sought to evaluate the effect of exogenous melatonin on nocturnal sleep quantity in these patients and, furthermore, to describe the kinetics of melatonin after oral administration in this patient population, thereby guiding future dosing schedules.We conducted a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial in 24 patients who had undergone a tracheostomy to aid weaning from mechanical ventilation. Oral melatonin 10 mg or placebo was administered at 9 p.m. for four nights. Nocturnal sleep was monitored using the bispectral index (BIS) and was expressed in terms of sleep efficiency index (SEI) and area under the curve (AUC). Secondary endpoints were SEI measured by actigraphy and nurse and patient assessments. Plasma melatonin concentrations were measured in nine patients in the melatonin group on the first night.Nocturnal sleep time was 2.5 hours in the placebo group (mean SEI = 0.26, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.17 to 0.36). Melatonin use was associated with a 1-hour increase in nocturnal sleep (SEI difference = 0.12, 95% CI -0.02 to 0.27; P = 0.09) and a decrease in BIS AUC indicating 'better' sleep (AUC difference = -54.23, 95% CI -104.47 to -3.98; P = 0.04). Results from the additional sleep measurement methods were inconclusive. Melatonin appeared to be rapidly absorbed from the oral solution, producing higher plasma concentrations relative to similar doses reported in healthy individuals. Plasma concentrations declined biexponentially, but morning (8 a.m.) plasma levels remained supraphysiological.In our patients, nocturnal sleep quantity was severely compromised and melatonin use was associated with increased nocturnal sleep efficiency. Although these promising findings need to be confirmed by a larger randomised clinical trial, they do suggest a possible future role for melatonin in the routine care of critically ill patients. Our pharmacokinetic analysis suggests that the 10-mg dose used in this study is too high in these patients and may lead to carryover of effects into the next morning. Reduced doses of 1 to 2 mg could be used in future studies.Current Controlled Trials ISRCTN47578325.Melatonin reduces the need for sedation in ICU patients: a randomized controlled trial.Critically ill patients suffer from physiological sleep deprivation and have reduced blood melatonin levels. This study was designed to determine whether nocturnal melatonin supplementation would reduce the need for sedation in patients with critical illness.A single-center, double-blind randomized placebo-controlled trial was carried out from July 2007 to December 2009, in a mixed medical-surgical Intensive Care Unit of a University hospital, without any form of external funding. Of 1158 patients admitted to ICU and treated with conscious enteral sedation, 82 critically-ill with mechanical ventilation >48 hours and Simplified Acute Physiology Score II>32 points were randomized 1:1 to receive, at eight p.m. and midnight, melatonin (3+3mg) or placebo, from the third ICU day until ICU discharge. Primary outcome was total amount of enteral hydroxyzine administered.Melatonin treated patients received lower amount of enteral hydroxyzine. Other neurological indicators (amount of some neuroactive drugs, pain, agitation, anxiety, sleep observed by nurses, need for restraints, need for extra sedation, nurse evaluation of sedation adequacy) seemed improved, with reduced cost for neuroactive drugs. Post-traumatic stress disorder prevalence did not differ between groups, nor did ICU or hospital mortality. Study limitations include the differences between groups before intervention, the small sample size, and the single-center observation.Long-term enteral melatonin supplementation may result in a decreased need for sedation, with improved neurological indicators and cost reduction. Further multicenter evaluations are required to confirm these results with different sedation protocols.Melatonin Pharmacological Blood Levels Increase Total Antioxidant Capacity in Critically Ill Patients. In this study, the aim was to test the biochemical effects of melatonin supplementation in Intensive Care Unit (ICU) patients, since their blood levels are decreased. Sixty-four patients were enrolled in the study. From the evening of the 3rd ICU day, patients were randomized to receive oral melatonin (3 mg, group M) or placebo (group P) twice daily, at 20:00 and 24:00, until discharged. Blood was taken (at 00:00 and 14:00), on the 3rd ICU day to assess basal nocturnal melatonin values, and then during the treatment period on the 4th and 8th ICU days. Melatonin, total antioxidant capacity, and oxidative stress were evaluated in serum. Melatonin circadian rhythm before treatment was similar in the two groups, with a partial preservation of the cycle. Four hours from the 1st administration (4th ICU day, 00:00), melatonin levels increased to 2514 (982.3; 7148) pg·mL Pharmacokinetics of a novel dosing regimen of oral melatonin in critically ill patients.Loss of circadian rhythms and reduced concentrations of endogenous melatonin are common in critically ill patients. After exogenous administration, supra-physiological concentrations in serum are only ephemeral, which may explain the absence of significant therapeutic effect on sleep. The aim of this study is to describe the pharmacokinetics of enteral melatonin in critically ill patients administered in a novel regimen aiming to simulate endogenous release.Thirteen patients in the recovery phase of critical illness were randomised to receive enteral melatonin or placebo. In the melatonin group, a total of 6 mg was administered as solution through their feeding tube, commencing with a 3 mg loading dose at 9 pm and six subsequent 0.5 mg doses hourly. The placebo was administered using a similar regimen. Serial blood samples were taken and measured using a validated chromatographic method. The concentration-time data for serum melatonin concentrations were described using non-linear mixed-effects modelling.The observed concentrations in the melatonin patients were significantly higher than that observed in the placebo patients. The concentrations in the patients administered melatonin were also higher than endogenous melatonin concentrations previously reported in non-critically ill patients. The patients administered melatonin had a mean clearance, volume of distribution and absorption rate constant of melatonin was 55.2 L/h, 767 L and 0.76 h-1, respectively.Exogenous administration of melatonin with a loading dose of 3 mg followed by an hourly dose of 0.5 mg demonstrates good oral bioavailability and results in supra-physiological and sustained concentrations of serum melatonin during 12 h overnight.A double-blind placebo-controlled randomised pilot study of nocturnal melatonin in tracheostomised patients.Patients in the intensive care unit often suffer from lack of sleep at night. We hypothesised that nocturnal melatonin may increase observed nocturnal sleep in tracheostomised patients.Double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled pilot study.ICU of a tertiary hospital.Thirty-two ICU patients with tracheostomy who were not receiving continuous sedation.We administered either oral melatonin (3mg) or placebo at 20:00. We collected pre- and post-dosage blood samples on Days 1 and 3 to confirm drug delivery. Primary outcome measure was number of hours of observed sleep at night, assessed by the bedside nurse. Secondary outcome measures included comparison of the incidence of agitation, assessed by score on the Riker Sedation-Agitation Scale, and requirement for sedatives or haloperidol to settle agitation.Pre-treatment melatonin levels in the two groups were similarly low: 4.8 pg/mL (95% CI, 2.4-7.5) for melatonin versus 2.4 (95% CI, 1.6-3.2) for placebo (P=0.13). Post-treatment, melatonin levels increased significantly in the melatonin group compared with the placebo group (3543 pg/mL versus 3 pg/mL; P<0.0001). However, subsequent observed nocturnal sleep was similar in the two groups: 240 minutes (range, 75-331.3) for melatonin v 243.4 minutes (range, 0-344.1) for placebo (P=0.98). Observed diurnal sleep was also similar: 138.7 minutes (range, 50-230) with melatonin v 104 minutes (range, 0-485) for placebo (P=0.42). The incidence of agitation was non-significantly higher in the melatonin group (31% v 7%; P=0.11), while the requirement for extra sedation or use of haloperidol was slightly higher in the placebo group (57% versus 46%; P=0.56).Melatonin is well absorbed, and a standard dose increases blood levels approximately 1000-fold. However, in this pilot assessment, these high levels failed to increase observed nocturnal sleep or induce other observable benefits in tracheostomised ICU patients.