Ultrasound to confirm gastric tube placement in prehospital management.In emergency medicine, the gastric tube (GT) has many purposes, however in prehospital settings, the only indication is gastric decompression. To date, there is lack of recommendation on the diagnostic methods to verify correct GT placement in prehospital. The aim of this study is to estimate diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in confirming gastric tubes placement in a prehospital setting.This was a prospective multicentre study conducted in two French towns (Marseille and Grasse) over a one-year period from May 2010 to May 2011.One hundred and thirty patients were included in the study with an M/F sex ratio of 77/53 and a mean age of 55.7±19.8 years. The GT position was confirmed by ultrasound, with direct visualization in the gastric area in 116 of the 130 patients. In 14 cases, the ultrasound failed to visualize the tip of the GT; these results were due in 2 cases to gas interposition and in 12 cases the GT was shown by final X-ray to be located in the end of the oesophagus. Direct visualization by ultrasound thus has a sensitivity of 98.3% [94-99.5] and a specificity of 100% [75.7-100], a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 85.7%, Youden's index of 0.98. GT size affects ultrasound visualization; the larger the GT, the easier it is to see.Bedside ultrasound thus appears to constitute an effective and reliable diagnostic procedure for confirming correct gastric tube placement in prehospital settings.[Ultrasonography of the gastrointestinal tube (author's transl)].Ultrasound diagnosis of nasogastric tube misplacement into the trachea during bypass surgery.[Ultrasound evaluation of the nasogastric tube position in prehospital].To assess the feasibility and actual performance of ultrasound control in verification of the correct positioning of a nasogastric tube in pre-hospital settings.Prospective, observational, single-centre study.Correct positioning of nasogastric tubes in patients intubated in a pre-hospital setting was verified by ultrasound and routinely compared with the results of two pre-hospital tests, namely a test involving insufflation of air through a syringe coupled with epigastric auscultation and a test involving aspiration of gastric fluid with a syringe. Routine x-ray control was carried out and compared with the pre-hospital results.Ninety-six patients were included. Mean age was 52 years (median: 53.5 years, SD: 23 years). In 83% of the patients (n=80), the nasogastric tube was located by ultrasound immediately during the insertion procedure. The mean times to ultrasound confirmation of correct positioning of the nasogastric tube were 7s (median: 2s; SD: 16s) and 19s for the syringe tests (median 19s, SD: 5s). Eight ultrasound control tests were negative. Location coupled with insufflation of air through a syringe allowed detection of the nasogastric tube in the stomach but without providing confirmation of the actual gastric position. The pre-hospital ultrasound results were confirmed by subsequent radiological controls at the hospital.The ultrasound test performed in our study to verify correct positioning of a nasogastric tube is feasible in a pre-hospital setting. This technique is rapid and non-irradiating and is more sensitive and specific than the syringe tests commonly used in pre-hospital settings, and it may be performed in place of the latter tests.Confirmation of transpyloric feeding tube placement by ultrasonography.We compared ultrasonography with radiography for placement of transpyloric feeding tubes. Ultrasound study successfully determined tube tip position and gave functional information unavailable with radiography, allowing for greater accuracy of placement and the observation of transpyloric reflux of feedings.The effectiveness of ultrasonography in verifying the placement of a nasogastric tube in patients with low consciousness at an emergency center.This study was designed to compare the effectiveness of using auscultation, pH measurements of gastric aspirates, and ultrasonography as physical examination methods to verify nasogastric tube(NGT) placement in emergency room patients with low consciousness who require NGT insertion.The study included 47 patients who were all over 18 years of age. In all patients, tube placement was verified by chest X-rays. Auscultation, pH analysis of gastric aspirates, and ultrasonography were conducted on each patient in random order. The mean patient age was 57.62 ± 17.24 years, and 28 males (59.6%) and 19 females (40.4%) were included. The NGT was inserted by an emergency room resident. For pH testing, gastric aspirates were dropped onto litmus paper, and the resulting color of the paper was compared with a reference table. Ultrasonography was performed by an emergency medicine specialist, and the chest X-ray examination was interpreted by a different emergency medicine specialist who did not conduct the ultrasonography test. The results of the auscultation, gastric aspirate pH, and ultrasonography examinations were compared with the results of the chest x-ray examination.The sensitivity and specificity were 100% and 33.3%, respectively, for auscultation and 86.4% and 66.7%, respectively, for ultrasonography. Kappa values were the highest for auscultation at 0.484 compared to chest x-rays, followed by 0.299 for ultrasonography and 0.444 for pH analysis of the gastric aspirate. The ultrasonography has a positive predictive value of 97.4% and a negative predictive value of 25%.Ultrasonography is useful for confirming the results of auscultation after NGT insertion among patients with low consciousness at an emergency center. When ultrasound findings suggest that the NGT placement is not gastric, additional chest X-ray should be performed.Sonography as an alternative to radiography for nasogastric feeding tube location.To evaluate bedside sonographic confirmation of weighted-tip nasogastric feeding tube position, by comparison to radiography.Single-center, double-blind prospective study in a 14-bed medical intensive care unit (ICU) in a 780-bed teaching hospital.Thirty-three ICU patients undergoing nasogastric tube insertion for enteral feeding.The tip of the nasogastric tube was located both by sonography and standard radiography.The accuracy and procedure times of sonography and radiography for nasogastric tube tip location were compared during 35 procedures in 33 patients. The nasogastric tube tip was visualized by sonography in 34 of 35 procedures (sensitivity 97%) and by radiography in all procedures. The median length of the entire procedure was 24 min and 180 min with sonography and radiography, respectively.Bedside sonography performed by nonradiologists is a sensitive method for confirming the position of weighted-tip feeding nasogastric feeding tubes. It is more rapid than conventional radiography and can easily be taught to ICU physicians. Conventional radiography could be reserved for cases in which sonography is inconclusive.Should ultrasound be routinely used to confirm correct positioning of nasogastric tubes in neonates?Bedside sonographic-guided versus blind nasoenteric feeding tube placement in critically ill patients.To compare a blind manual bedside method for placing feeding tubes into the small bowel vs. a sonographic bedside technique in critically ill patients.Prospective study with a random sample.Multidisciplinary intensive care unit in a tertiary care university hospital.Thirty-five adult patients. All patients were hemodynamically stable, mechanically ventilated, and required a nasoenteric tube placement for short-term enteral feeding due to impaired gastric emptying.A well-known, blind, manual, bedside method for postpyloric tube placement was always attempted first in all cases. The technique was considered successful when a postpyloric location of the tip of the tube was achieved as shown by abdominal roentgenogram. However, if after 30 mins we failed to enter the small bowel, a radiologist attempted a sonographic bedside technique for postpyloric tube insertion. Finally, when the feeding tube was in place, before starting enteral nutrition, a nasogastric tube was inserted into the stomach.The blind manual method was successful in nine (25.7%) of the 35 patients and the final location of these feeding tubes was the proximal jejunum. The average time for placement of the feeding tubes with this manual technique was 13.9 +/- 7.4 mins (range 5 to 30). The sonographic technique was successful in 22 (84.6%) of the remaining patients and the final location of the feeding tubes was three (11%) tubes in the second portion of the duodenum, eight (31%) tubes in the third portion of the duodenum, and 11 (42%) tubes in the proximal jejunum. The average time for placement with the sonographic technique was 18.3 +/- 8.2 mins (range 5 to 35). The pyloric outlet was sonographically akinetic or severely hypokinetic in 13 patients, and in four of them, we were unable to achieve postpyloric tube placement. In these four patients, the tubes were subsequently placed by endoscopy.The sonographic bedside technique for placing feeding tubes into the small bowel in critically III patients has a success rate of 84.6% (confidence interval 71% to 98%) after the failure of the blind bedside manual method, proving that the former is significantly more successful. This sonographic technique facilitates the insertion of the tubes in patients who cannot be moved and in those patients with severe impairment of the peristaltic activity of the stomach.Inflation and positioning of the gastric balloon of a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube under ultrasonographic control.Ultrasound-guided nasogastric feeding tube placement in critical care patients.Nasogastric feeding tube (NGT) placement is a common practice performed in intensive care units (ICUs). Complications due to the improper placement of NGT are well known. In this prospective descriptive study, the effectiveness of ultrasound (US)-guided NGT placement was investigated.Fifty-six mechanically ventilated patients monitored in the ICU were included. A linear US probe was transversely placed just cranial to the suprasternal notch, and the concentric layers of the esophagus were attempted to be viewed on the posterolateral side of the trachea (generally left) by shifting the probe. If the esophagus can be seen, an attempt was made to insert the NGT under real-time visualization of ultrasonography. Furthermore, gastric placement of the NGT tip was confirmed with abdominal radiograph.A total of 56 patients were included in the study. For 52 (92.8%), the NGT image was obtained during placement within the esophagus. For 3 (5.3%), the esophagus could not be seen by US, and NGT was placed blindly. For 1 patient, we could not detect passing of the NGT into the stomach despite the successful visualization of esophagus. In this patient, NGT was radiographically detected in the trachea after the procedure.This study revealed that passing of the NGT through the esophagus could be visualized at a high rate in real-time US among ICU patients. These data suggest that ultrasonographic visualization of the upper esophagus during NGT insertion can be used as an adjuvant method for confirmation of correct placement.Ultrasound to confirm gastric tube placement in prehospital management.In emergency medicine, the gastric tube (GT) has many purposes, however in prehospital settings, the only indication is gastric decompression. To date, there is lack of recommendation on the diagnostic methods to verify correct GT placement in prehospital. The aim of this study is to estimate diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound in confirming gastric tubes placement in a prehospital setting.This was a prospective multicentre study conducted in two French towns (Marseille and Grasse) over a one-year period from May 2010 to May 2011.One hundred and thirty patients were included in the study with an M/F sex ratio of 77/53 and a mean age of 55.7±19.8 years. The GT position was confirmed by ultrasound, with direct visualization in the gastric area in 116 of the 130 patients. In 14 cases, the ultrasound failed to visualize the tip of the GT; these results were due in 2 cases to gas interposition and in 12 cases the GT was shown by final X-ray to be located in the end of the oesophagus. Direct visualization by ultrasound thus has a sensitivity of 98.3% [94-99.5] and a specificity of 100% [75.7-100], a positive predictive value of 100% and a negative predictive value of 85.7%, Youden's index of 0.98. GT size affects ultrasound visualization; the larger the GT, the easier it is to see.Bedside ultrasound thus appears to constitute an effective and reliable diagnostic procedure for confirming correct gastric tube placement in prehospital settings.[Ultrasonography of the gastrointestinal tube (author's transl)].Ultrasound diagnosis of nasogastric tube misplacement into the trachea during bypass surgery.[Ultrasound evaluation of the nasogastric tube position in prehospital].To assess the feasibility and actual performance of ultrasound control in verification of the correct positioning of a nasogastric tube in pre-hospital settings.Prospective, observational, single-centre study.Correct positioning of nasogastric tubes in patients intubated in a pre-hospital setting was verified by ultrasound and routinely compared with the results of two pre-hospital tests, namely a test involving insufflation of air through a syringe coupled with epigastric auscultation and a test involving aspiration of gastric fluid with a syringe. Routine x-ray control was carried out and compared with the pre-hospital results.Ninety-six patients were included. Mean age was 52 years (median: 53.5 years, SD: 23 years). In 83% of the patients (n=80), the nasogastric tube was located by ultrasound immediately during the insertion procedure. The mean times to ultrasound confirmation of correct positioning of the nasogastric tube were 7s (median: 2s; SD: 16s) and 19s for the syringe tests (median 19s, SD: 5s). Eight ultrasound control tests were negative. Location coupled with insufflation of air through a syringe allowed detection of the nasogastric tube in the stomach but without providing confirmation of the actual gastric position. The pre-hospital ultrasound results were confirmed by subsequent radiological controls at the hospital.The ultrasound test performed in our study to verify correct positioning of a nasogastric tube is feasible in a pre-hospital setting. This technique is rapid and non-irradiating and is more sensitive and specific than the syringe tests commonly used in pre-hospital settings, and it may be performed in place of the latter tests.Confirmation of transpyloric feeding tube placement by ultrasonography.We compared ultrasonography with radiography for placement of transpyloric feeding tubes. Ultrasound study successfully determined tube tip position and gave functional information unavailable with radiography, allowing for greater accuracy of placement and the observation of transpyloric reflux of feedings.The effectiveness of ultrasonography in verifying the placement of a nasogastric tube in patients with low consciousness at an emergency center.This study was designed to compare the effectiveness of using auscultation, pH measurements of gastric aspirates, and ultrasonography as physical examination methods to verify nasogastric tube(NGT) placement in emergency room patients with low consciousness who require NGT insertion.The study included 47 patients who were all over 18 years of age. In all patients, tube placement was verified by chest X-rays. Auscultation, pH analysis of gastric aspirates, and ultrasonography were conducted on each patient in random order. The mean patient age was 57.62 ± 17.24 years, and 28 males (59.6%) and 19 females (40.4%) were included. The NGT was inserted by an emergency room resident. For pH testing, gastric aspirates were dropped onto litmus paper, and the resulting color of the paper was compared with a reference table. Ultrasonography was performed by an emergency medicine specialist, and the chest X-ray examination was interpreted by a different emergency medicine specialist who did not conduct the ultrasonography test. The results of the auscultation, gastric aspirate pH, and ultrasonography examinations were compared with the results of the chest x-ray examination.The sensitivity and specificity were 100% and 33.3%, respectively, for auscultation and 86.4% and 66.7%, respectively, for ultrasonography. Kappa values were the highest for auscultation at 0.484 compared to chest x-rays, followed by 0.299 for ultrasonography and 0.444 for pH analysis of the gastric aspirate. The ultrasonography has a positive predictive value of 97.4% and a negative predictive value of 25%.Ultrasonography is useful for confirming the results of auscultation after NGT insertion among patients with low consciousness at an emergency center. When ultrasound findings suggest that the NGT placement is not gastric, additional chest X-ray should be performed.Sonography as an alternative to radiography for nasogastric feeding tube location.To evaluate bedside sonographic confirmation of weighted-tip nasogastric feeding tube position, by comparison to radiography.Single-center, double-blind prospective study in a 14-bed medical intensive care unit (ICU) in a 780-bed teaching hospital.Thirty-three ICU patients undergoing nasogastric tube insertion for enteral feeding.The tip of the nasogastric tube was located both by sonography and standard radiography.The accuracy and procedure times of sonography and radiography for nasogastric tube tip location were compared during 35 procedures in 33 patients. The nasogastric tube tip was visualized by sonography in 34 of 35 procedures (sensitivity 97%) and by radiography in all procedures. The median length of the entire procedure was 24 min and 180 min with sonography and radiography, respectively.Bedside sonography performed by nonradiologists is a sensitive method for confirming the position of weighted-tip feeding nasogastric feeding tubes. It is more rapid than conventional radiography and can easily be taught to ICU physicians. Conventional radiography could be reserved for cases in which sonography is inconclusive.Should ultrasound be routinely used to confirm correct positioning of nasogastric tubes in neonates?Bedside sonographic-guided versus blind nasoenteric feeding tube placement in critically ill patients.To compare a blind manual bedside method for placing feeding tubes into the small bowel vs. a sonographic bedside technique in critically ill patients.Prospective study with a random sample.Multidisciplinary intensive care unit in a tertiary care university hospital.Thirty-five adult patients. All patients were hemodynamically stable, mechanically ventilated, and required a nasoenteric tube placement for short-term enteral feeding due to impaired gastric emptying.A well-known, blind, manual, bedside method for postpyloric tube placement was always attempted first in all cases. The technique was considered successful when a postpyloric location of the tip of the tube was achieved as shown by abdominal roentgenogram. However, if after 30 mins we failed to enter the small bowel, a radiologist attempted a sonographic bedside technique for postpyloric tube insertion. Finally, when the feeding tube was in place, before starting enteral nutrition, a nasogastric tube was inserted into the stomach.The blind manual method was successful in nine (25.7%) of the 35 patients and the final location of these feeding tubes was the proximal jejunum. The average time for placement of the feeding tubes with this manual technique was 13.9 +/- 7.4 mins (range 5 to 30). The sonographic technique was successful in 22 (84.6%) of the remaining patients and the final location of the feeding tubes was three (11%) tubes in the second portion of the duodenum, eight (31%) tubes in the third portion of the duodenum, and 11 (42%) tubes in the proximal jejunum. The average time for placement with the sonographic technique was 18.3 +/- 8.2 mins (range 5 to 35). The pyloric outlet was sonographically akinetic or severely hypokinetic in 13 patients, and in four of them, we were unable to achieve postpyloric tube placement. In these four patients, the tubes were subsequently placed by endoscopy.The sonographic bedside technique for placing feeding tubes into the small bowel in critically III patients has a success rate of 84.6% (confidence interval 71% to 98%) after the failure of the blind bedside manual method, proving that the former is significantly more successful. This sonographic technique facilitates the insertion of the tubes in patients who cannot be moved and in those patients with severe impairment of the peristaltic activity of the stomach.Inflation and positioning of the gastric balloon of a Sengstaken-Blakemore tube under ultrasonographic control.Ultrasound-guided nasogastric feeding tube placement in critical care patients.Nasogastric feeding tube (NGT) placement is a common practice performed in intensive care units (ICUs). Complications due to the improper placement of NGT are well known. In this prospective descriptive study, the effectiveness of ultrasound (US)-guided NGT placement was investigated.Fifty-six mechanically ventilated patients monitored in the ICU were included. A linear US probe was transversely placed just cranial to the suprasternal notch, and the concentric layers of the esophagus were attempted to be viewed on the posterolateral side of the trachea (generally left) by shifting the probe. If the esophagus can be seen, an attempt was made to insert the NGT under real-time visualization of ultrasonography. Furthermore, gastric placement of the NGT tip was confirmed with abdominal radiograph.A total of 56 patients were included in the study. For 52 (92.8%), the NGT image was obtained during placement within the esophagus. For 3 (5.3%), the esophagus could not be seen by US, and NGT was placed blindly. For 1 patient, we could not detect passing of the NGT into the stomach despite the successful visualization of esophagus. In this patient, NGT was radiographically detected in the trachea after the procedure.This study revealed that passing of the NGT through the esophagus could be visualized at a high rate in real-time US among ICU patients. These data suggest that ultrasonographic visualization of the upper esophagus during NGT insertion can be used as an adjuvant method for confirmation of correct placement.