Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination: agreement in a cross-sectional study with an elderly sample.We aimed to compare the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) with the Mini-Cog, measuring agreement in participants' classification, using a general population sample.Cross-sectional evaluation of 609 community dwellers aged ≥60 years was performed by trained interviewers. Cohen's kappa and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to assess overall agreement, and Cronbach alphas computed to assess reliability. Two-parameter Item Response Theory models (difficulty and discrimination parameters) were used to assess discrimination.Considering MMSE cut-point for scores <24, 3.1% of the participants would be 'cognitive impaired' and 6.2% considering cut-point scores <25. Following Mini-Cog's cut-point score <3, 11.3% would be impaired. For MMSE cut-point <24 and Mini-Cog <3, we observed a Cohen's kappa of 0.116 (95% CI: -0.073 to 0.305), and of 0.258 (95% CI: 0.101-0.415) for cut-point <25. The highest kappa was obtained for cut-point <26 on the MMSE and Mini-Cog <3 (kappa = 0.413). MMSE Cronbach alpha was 0.6108 and Mini-Cog's alpha was 0.2776. Co-calibration according to inherent ability is graphically presented.Agreement between scales seems fragile in our sample. The discriminative and reliability analysis suggests a better performance for subsets of the MMSE compared with the Mini-Cog. Usefulness of calibrated scores is discussed.Evaluation of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in cognitive screening across four American ethnic groups.The purpose of this study was to examine the performance of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in four American ethnic groups (N = 691), evaluate the influence of demographic factors and depressive symptoms on the FAQ and compare its performance with two cognitive screening measures, the Mini-Cog and the MMSE. Half of FAQ items were less frequently done by men than women. FAQ total scores did not differ across the four ethnic groups but regression analyses indicated effects for age, education and depressive symptoms. The Mini-Cog and MMSE evidenced demographic and depressive symptom effects. FAQ performed well across the ethnic groups. Development of age and education corrections for the FAQ is recommended as is a screen for depression in cognitive screening batteries.Cognitive impairment, chronic disease burden, and functional disability: a population study of older Italians.To evaluate associations of cognitive impairment and disease burden with disability in an elderly population.The Mini-Cog was used as a cognitive screen in a population-based survey of health and functional status of 2,192 randomly selected older adults (age 65+ years) in 11 regions of Italy. Associations of cognitive and disease measures with functional outcomes were calculated using hierarchical logistic regressions including age, Mini-Cog score, disease burden, age, education, and geographic region. Statistical significance was assigned at p <0.01.Mini-Cog scores were related to all functional indicators (activities of daily living [ADLs], social activities, exercise, telephone and face-to-face conversation, urinary control, and ability to read the newspaper) as well as stroke, falls, and dementia diagnoses. In univariate analyses, low education was associated with Mini-Cog scores, disease burden, and disability. However, in logistic regressions, Mini-Cog score and disease burden, but not education, remained significant predictors of all basic ADLs and most higher-order functions. Functional disability was best predicted by a Mini-Cog cutoff score of 1 out of 5. Overall, although both are significant, the impact of cognitive impairment on basic ADL impairment was over four times greater than that of disease burden (accounting for 14% versus 3% of variance).Cognitive impairment assessed by the Mini-Cog is a more powerful predictor of impaired ADLs than disease burden in older adults. The association of education with Mini-Cog score did not bias its ability to predict functional status. Results suggest that the Mini-Cog could be useful in assessing older population assistance needs.Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination: agreement in a cross-sectional study with an elderly sample.We aimed to compare the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) with the Mini-Cog, measuring agreement in participants' classification, using a general population sample.Cross-sectional evaluation of 609 community dwellers aged ≥60 years was performed by trained interviewers. Cohen's kappa and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to assess overall agreement, and Cronbach alphas computed to assess reliability. Two-parameter Item Response Theory models (difficulty and discrimination parameters) were used to assess discrimination.Considering MMSE cut-point for scores <24, 3.1% of the participants would be 'cognitive impaired' and 6.2% considering cut-point scores <25. Following Mini-Cog's cut-point score <3, 11.3% would be impaired. For MMSE cut-point <24 and Mini-Cog <3, we observed a Cohen's kappa of 0.116 (95% CI: -0.073 to 0.305), and of 0.258 (95% CI: 0.101-0.415) for cut-point <25. The highest kappa was obtained for cut-point <26 on the MMSE and Mini-Cog <3 (kappa = 0.413). MMSE Cronbach alpha was 0.6108 and Mini-Cog's alpha was 0.2776. Co-calibration according to inherent ability is graphically presented.Agreement between scales seems fragile in our sample. The discriminative and reliability analysis suggests a better performance for subsets of the MMSE compared with the Mini-Cog. Usefulness of calibrated scores is discussed.The mini-cog: a cognitive 'vital signs' measure for dementia screening in multi-lingual elderly.The Mini-Cog, a composite of three-item recall and clock drawing, was developed as a brief test for discriminating demented from non-demented persons in a community sample of culturally, linguistically, and educationally heterogeneous older adults.All 129 who met criteria for probable dementia based on informant interviews and 120 with no history of cognitive decline were included; 124 were non-English speakers.Sensitivity, specificity, and diagnostic value of the Mini-Cog were compared with those of the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) and Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument (CASI).The Mini-Cog had the highest sensitivity (99%) and correctly classified the greatest percentage (96%) of subjects. Moreover, its diagnostic value was not influenced by education or language, while that of the CASI was adversely influenced by low education, and both education and language compromised the diagnostic value of the MMSE. Administration time for the Mini-Cog was 3 minutes vs 7 minutes for the MMSE.The Mini-Cog required minimal language interpretation and training to administer, and no test forms of scoring modifications were needed to compensate for the extensive linguistic and educational heterogeneity of the sample. Validation in clinical and population-based samples is warranted, as its brevity and ease of administration suggest that the Mini-Cog might be readily incorporated into general practice and senior care settings as a routine 'cognitive vital signs' measure.Evaluation of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in cognitive screening across four American ethnic groups.The purpose of this study was to examine the performance of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in four American ethnic groups (N = 691), evaluate the influence of demographic factors and depressive symptoms on the FAQ and compare its performance with two cognitive screening measures, the Mini-Cog and the MMSE. Half of FAQ items were less frequently done by men than women. FAQ total scores did not differ across the four ethnic groups but regression analyses indicated effects for age, education and depressive symptoms. The Mini-Cog and MMSE evidenced demographic and depressive symptom effects. FAQ performed well across the ethnic groups. Development of age and education corrections for the FAQ is recommended as is a screen for depression in cognitive screening batteries.Cognitive impairment, chronic disease burden, and functional disability: a population study of older Italians.To evaluate associations of cognitive impairment and disease burden with disability in an elderly population.The Mini-Cog was used as a cognitive screen in a population-based survey of health and functional status of 2,192 randomly selected older adults (age 65+ years) in 11 regions of Italy. Associations of cognitive and disease measures with functional outcomes were calculated using hierarchical logistic regressions including age, Mini-Cog score, disease burden, age, education, and geographic region. Statistical significance was assigned at p <0.01.Mini-Cog scores were related to all functional indicators (activities of daily living [ADLs], social activities, exercise, telephone and face-to-face conversation, urinary control, and ability to read the newspaper) as well as stroke, falls, and dementia diagnoses. In univariate analyses, low education was associated with Mini-Cog scores, disease burden, and disability. However, in logistic regressions, Mini-Cog score and disease burden, but not education, remained significant predictors of all basic ADLs and most higher-order functions. Functional disability was best predicted by a Mini-Cog cutoff score of 1 out of 5. Overall, although both are significant, the impact of cognitive impairment on basic ADL impairment was over four times greater than that of disease burden (accounting for 14% versus 3% of variance).Cognitive impairment assessed by the Mini-Cog is a more powerful predictor of impaired ADLs than disease burden in older adults. The association of education with Mini-Cog score did not bias its ability to predict functional status. Results suggest that the Mini-Cog could be useful in assessing older population assistance needs.The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation in a population-based sample.To test the Mini-Cog, a brief cognitive screening test, in an epidemiological study of dementia in older Americans.A population-based post hoc examination of the sensitivity and specificity of the Mini-Cog for detecting dementia in an existing data set.The Monongahela Valley in Western Pennsylvania.A random sample of 1,119 older adults enrolled in the Monongahela Valley Independent Elders Survey (MoVIES).The effectiveness of the Mini-Cog in detecting independently diagnosed dementia was compared with that of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and a standardized neuropsychological battery.The Mini-Cog, scored by an algorithm as "possibly impaired" or "probably normal," and the MMSE, at a cutpoint of 25, had similar sensitivity (76% vs 79%) and specificity (89% vs 88%) for dementia, comparable with that achieved using a conventional neuropsychological battery (75% sensitivity, 90% specificity).When applied post hoc to an existing population, the Mini-Cog was as effective in detecting dementia as longer screening and assessment instruments. Its brevity is a distinct advantage when the goal is to improve identification of older adults in a population who may be cognitively impaired. Prior evidence of good performance in a multiethnic community-based sample further supports its validity in the ethnolinguistically diverse populations of the United States in which widely used cognitive screens often fail.Simplifying detection of cognitive impairment: comparison of the Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination in a multiethnic sample.To compare detection of cognitive impairment using the Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and to identify sociodemographic variables that influence detection in an ethnoculturally diverse sample.Cross-sectional.A registry of the University of Washington Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Satellite.A heterogeneous community sample (n=371) of predominantly ethnic minority elderly assessed using a standardized research protocol, 231 of whom met criteria for dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).Demographic data, a standardized research protocol for cognitive assessment and dementia diagnosis, MMSE, and Mini-Cog.Both screens effectively detected cognitive impairment, the Mini-Cog slightly better than the MMSE (P<.01). Overall accuracy of classification was 83% for the Mini-Cog and 81% for the MMSE. The Mini-Cog was superior in recognizing patients with Alzheimer-type dementias (P=.05). Low education negatively affected detection using the MMSE (P<.001), whereas education did not affect the Mini-Cog, and low literacy minimally affected it.The Mini-Cog detects clinically significant cognitive impairment as well as or better than the MMSE in multiethnic elderly individuals, is easier to administer to non-English speakers, and is less biased by low education and literacy.Improving identification of cognitive impairment in primary care.To compare the relative level and predictors of accuracy of a brief cognitive screen, the Mini-Cog, with spontaneous detection of cognitive impairment by subjects' primary care physicians.A heterogeneous community sample (n=371) of predominantly ethnic minority elderly assessed by standardized research protocol, 231 of whom met criteria for dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).The Mini-Cog detected cognitively impaired subjects much more effectively than did subject's own physicians (p<0.0001), correctly classifying 83% of the sample and 84% of cognitively impaired subjects. Physicians correctly classified 59% of all subjects but identified only 41% of cognitively impaired subjects. The Mini-Cog's advantage over physicians was greatest when impairment was mildest (screen vs physician recognition at CDR 0.5, 58% vs 6%; at CDR 1, 92% vs 41%). Additional subject variables associated with missed detection by physicians were non-Alzheimer type dementia and low education, low literacy, and non-English speaking, factors that had little or no effect on the performance of the Mini-Cog. Ethnic differences, also observed for physician recognition, were not significant in final regression equations. The number and recency of primary care visits, and duration of the primary care relationship, were not associated with physicians' recognition of cognitive impairment.This study demonstrates that recognition of cognitive impairment by primary care physicians is adversely influenced by important patient and disease characteristics. Results also show that use of the Mini-Cog would improve recognition of cognitive impairment in primary care, particularly in milder stages and in older adults subject to disparities in health care quality due to sociodemographic factors.Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination: agreement in a cross-sectional study with an elderly sample.We aimed to compare the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) with the Mini-Cog, measuring agreement in participants' classification, using a general population sample.Cross-sectional evaluation of 609 community dwellers aged ≥60 years was performed by trained interviewers. Cohen's kappa and 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated to assess overall agreement, and Cronbach alphas computed to assess reliability. Two-parameter Item Response Theory models (difficulty and discrimination parameters) were used to assess discrimination.Considering MMSE cut-point for scores <24, 3.1% of the participants would be 'cognitive impaired' and 6.2% considering cut-point scores <25. Following Mini-Cog's cut-point score <3, 11.3% would be impaired. For MMSE cut-point <24 and Mini-Cog <3, we observed a Cohen's kappa of 0.116 (95% CI: -0.073 to 0.305), and of 0.258 (95% CI: 0.101-0.415) for cut-point <25. The highest kappa was obtained for cut-point <26 on the MMSE and Mini-Cog <3 (kappa = 0.413). MMSE Cronbach alpha was 0.6108 and Mini-Cog's alpha was 0.2776. Co-calibration according to inherent ability is graphically presented.Agreement between scales seems fragile in our sample. The discriminative and reliability analysis suggests a better performance for subsets of the MMSE compared with the Mini-Cog. Usefulness of calibrated scores is discussed.The mini-cog: a cognitive 'vital signs' measure for dementia screening in multi-lingual elderly.The Mini-Cog, a composite of three-item recall and clock drawing, was developed as a brief test for discriminating demented from non-demented persons in a community sample of culturally, linguistically, and educationally heterogeneous older adults.All 129 who met criteria for probable dementia based on informant interviews and 120 with no history of cognitive decline were included; 124 were non-English speakers.Sensitivity, specificity, and diagnostic value of the Mini-Cog were compared with those of the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE) and Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument (CASI).The Mini-Cog had the highest sensitivity (99%) and correctly classified the greatest percentage (96%) of subjects. Moreover, its diagnostic value was not influenced by education or language, while that of the CASI was adversely influenced by low education, and both education and language compromised the diagnostic value of the MMSE. Administration time for the Mini-Cog was 3 minutes vs 7 minutes for the MMSE.The Mini-Cog required minimal language interpretation and training to administer, and no test forms of scoring modifications were needed to compensate for the extensive linguistic and educational heterogeneity of the sample. Validation in clinical and population-based samples is warranted, as its brevity and ease of administration suggest that the Mini-Cog might be readily incorporated into general practice and senior care settings as a routine 'cognitive vital signs' measure.Evaluation of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in cognitive screening across four American ethnic groups.The purpose of this study was to examine the performance of the Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ) in four American ethnic groups (N = 691), evaluate the influence of demographic factors and depressive symptoms on the FAQ and compare its performance with two cognitive screening measures, the Mini-Cog and the MMSE. Half of FAQ items were less frequently done by men than women. FAQ total scores did not differ across the four ethnic groups but regression analyses indicated effects for age, education and depressive symptoms. The Mini-Cog and MMSE evidenced demographic and depressive symptom effects. FAQ performed well across the ethnic groups. Development of age and education corrections for the FAQ is recommended as is a screen for depression in cognitive screening batteries.Cognitive impairment, chronic disease burden, and functional disability: a population study of older Italians.To evaluate associations of cognitive impairment and disease burden with disability in an elderly population.The Mini-Cog was used as a cognitive screen in a population-based survey of health and functional status of 2,192 randomly selected older adults (age 65+ years) in 11 regions of Italy. Associations of cognitive and disease measures with functional outcomes were calculated using hierarchical logistic regressions including age, Mini-Cog score, disease burden, age, education, and geographic region. Statistical significance was assigned at p <0.01.Mini-Cog scores were related to all functional indicators (activities of daily living [ADLs], social activities, exercise, telephone and face-to-face conversation, urinary control, and ability to read the newspaper) as well as stroke, falls, and dementia diagnoses. In univariate analyses, low education was associated with Mini-Cog scores, disease burden, and disability. However, in logistic regressions, Mini-Cog score and disease burden, but not education, remained significant predictors of all basic ADLs and most higher-order functions. Functional disability was best predicted by a Mini-Cog cutoff score of 1 out of 5. Overall, although both are significant, the impact of cognitive impairment on basic ADL impairment was over four times greater than that of disease burden (accounting for 14% versus 3% of variance).Cognitive impairment assessed by the Mini-Cog is a more powerful predictor of impaired ADLs than disease burden in older adults. The association of education with Mini-Cog score did not bias its ability to predict functional status. Results suggest that the Mini-Cog could be useful in assessing older population assistance needs.The Mini-Cog as a screen for dementia: validation in a population-based sample.To test the Mini-Cog, a brief cognitive screening test, in an epidemiological study of dementia in older Americans.A population-based post hoc examination of the sensitivity and specificity of the Mini-Cog for detecting dementia in an existing data set.The Monongahela Valley in Western Pennsylvania.A random sample of 1,119 older adults enrolled in the Monongahela Valley Independent Elders Survey (MoVIES).The effectiveness of the Mini-Cog in detecting independently diagnosed dementia was compared with that of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and a standardized neuropsychological battery.The Mini-Cog, scored by an algorithm as "possibly impaired" or "probably normal," and the MMSE, at a cutpoint of 25, had similar sensitivity (76% vs 79%) and specificity (89% vs 88%) for dementia, comparable with that achieved using a conventional neuropsychological battery (75% sensitivity, 90% specificity).When applied post hoc to an existing population, the Mini-Cog was as effective in detecting dementia as longer screening and assessment instruments. Its brevity is a distinct advantage when the goal is to improve identification of older adults in a population who may be cognitively impaired. Prior evidence of good performance in a multiethnic community-based sample further supports its validity in the ethnolinguistically diverse populations of the United States in which widely used cognitive screens often fail.Simplifying detection of cognitive impairment: comparison of the Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination in a multiethnic sample.To compare detection of cognitive impairment using the Mini-Cog and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and to identify sociodemographic variables that influence detection in an ethnoculturally diverse sample.Cross-sectional.A registry of the University of Washington Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Satellite.A heterogeneous community sample (n=371) of predominantly ethnic minority elderly assessed using a standardized research protocol, 231 of whom met criteria for dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).Demographic data, a standardized research protocol for cognitive assessment and dementia diagnosis, MMSE, and Mini-Cog.Both screens effectively detected cognitive impairment, the Mini-Cog slightly better than the MMSE (P<.01). Overall accuracy of classification was 83% for the Mini-Cog and 81% for the MMSE. The Mini-Cog was superior in recognizing patients with Alzheimer-type dementias (P=.05). Low education negatively affected detection using the MMSE (P<.001), whereas education did not affect the Mini-Cog, and low literacy minimally affected it.The Mini-Cog detects clinically significant cognitive impairment as well as or better than the MMSE in multiethnic elderly individuals, is easier to administer to non-English speakers, and is less biased by low education and literacy.Improving identification of cognitive impairment in primary care.To compare the relative level and predictors of accuracy of a brief cognitive screen, the Mini-Cog, with spontaneous detection of cognitive impairment by subjects' primary care physicians.A heterogeneous community sample (n=371) of predominantly ethnic minority elderly assessed by standardized research protocol, 231 of whom met criteria for dementia or mild cognitive impairment (MCI).The Mini-Cog detected cognitively impaired subjects much more effectively than did subject's own physicians (p<0.0001), correctly classifying 83% of the sample and 84% of cognitively impaired subjects. Physicians correctly classified 59% of all subjects but identified only 41% of cognitively impaired subjects. The Mini-Cog's advantage over physicians was greatest when impairment was mildest (screen vs physician recognition at CDR 0.5, 58% vs 6%; at CDR 1, 92% vs 41%). Additional subject variables associated with missed detection by physicians were non-Alzheimer type dementia and low education, low literacy, and non-English speaking, factors that had little or no effect on the performance of the Mini-Cog. Ethnic differences, also observed for physician recognition, were not significant in final regression equations. The number and recency of primary care visits, and duration of the primary care relationship, were not associated with physicians' recognition of cognitive impairment.This study demonstrates that recognition of cognitive impairment by primary care physicians is adversely influenced by important patient and disease characteristics. Results also show that use of the Mini-Cog would improve recognition of cognitive impairment in primary care, particularly in milder stages and in older adults subject to disparities in health care quality due to sociodemographic factors.