Oral cancer screening in a high-risk underserved community--Vancouver Downtown Eastside.The objective of this study was to evaluate a clinic-centered oral cancer screening initiative in one of the poorest communities in Canada, assessing the need for screening and the acceptance of screening and identifying hindrances to both screening and follow-up. The study group included 204 people in the Vancouver Downtown Eastside (DTES). This was shown to be a high-risk community based on risk factors, lack of access to care, and the high frequency of oral mucosal anomalies. Acceptance of screening was high (98%); however, acceptance of biopsy for abnormal findings and follow-up was low. Among the 12 patients with clinical leukoplakia who were biopsied, 10 showed cancer or precancer. In summary, these data show a need for screening in this population and an ability to recruit patients to screening. They support a future expansion of this initiative to create a more comprehensive strategy for outreach to this underserved community that extends to screening, diagnostic work-up, and treatment.Outcome following a population screening programme for oral cancer and precancer in Japan.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the validity and outcome of an oral mucosal screening programme conducted in Japan. All adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname city were invited by letter to attend a free general health screen and oral examinations annually. Twenty- to 39-year-old females were also encouraged to participate. During the years 1996-98, a total of 19056 subjects (5885 male, 13171 female: mean age 60.7+/-11.3 years) were examined by three types of screeners: postgraduate dental residents (n=17), hospital dentists (n=5) and general dental practitioners (n=15). In the cohorts examined screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 783 (4.1%) subjects. Of those detected with mucosal lesions, 200 (25.5%) were referred and 137 (68. 5%) attended for follow up examination in hospital departments by specialists with full diagnostic back up facilities. Thirty-nine subjects were confirmed as having oral cancer or precancer (two squamous cell carcinomas, 37 leukoplakias) and 40 with lichen planus. Five false positives (3.6%) were found. Among the cases referred under other diagnostic labels no cancers were detected. Among those who attended for confirmation of oral cancer or precancer by a specialist, sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value were 0.92, 0.64 and 0.78, respectively. In males with oral cancer/leukoplakia, the prevalence of smoking, drinking and combined habits was higher than those with lichen planus or among negative subjects. The sensitivity and specificity determined from this research suggests that the performance of the Japanese dentists employed in screening was satisfactory. An attendance of 68% for re-examination by specialists compares well with other reported studies measuring patient compliance.[Model program for screening oral cancers in the Roma population].Oral cancer has been identified as a significant public health threat. It is reported that about 3,800 new cases of oral cancer are diagnosed in Hungary each year with approximately 1,700 associated deaths. Oral cancer is the 6th most common cancer in men. Most oral cancers are preventable; 75% of oral cancers are related to tobacco use, alcohol use, or use of both substances together. While there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of visual examination as a method of screening for oral cancer in the general population, screening in high-risk populations is highly recommended. It was presumed that high-risk behavior including tobacco and alcohol use is one of the characteristics of Roma people. The main aim of the study was to elaborate a screening model program for the Roma population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. In the program we planned to survey the risk factors in the target population, establish the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer and direct the patients to health care facilities. First we determined the target population in four Hungarian towns with the help of Roma social workers and local public health officers. We assembled a questionnaire on risk factors. Training for Roma social workers and screening personnel was also accomplished. Screening for oral precancerous lesions and cancer and survey the risk factors in the target population were performed at the same time. Patients screened to be positive were referred to specialists. Altogether 1,146 persons, 656 male and 490 female (age 20-77 years, mean 40 years), participated in the screening; 84% of them reported on some kind of complaints. We have got valid data on risk factors in connection with oral cancer. More than fifty percent of participants did not clean their teeth regularly, 75% were smokers, while 45% drunk alcohol regularly. 1,6% of screened participants had oral lesions that did not require referral to a specialist, while 2.3% of the screened subjects had referable oral mucosal lesions including leukoplakia. The overwhelming majority (93%) of participants screened to be positive did not see dentist regularly. As a conclusion, we elaborated a screening model program, which is applicable for disadvantaged (e.g. Roma) population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. We surveyed the risk factors in the target population, established the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer lesions and directed the patients to care facilities. We also assisted them to get appropriate long-term care and follow-up. The importance of screening activities targeted on high-risk population was underlined.Toludine blue test for detection of carcinoma of the oral cavity: an evaluation.Oral cancer screening as an integral part of general health screening in Tokoname City, Japan.To measure the attendance and compliance rates in oral mucosal screening (OMS) offered as part of a general health screen (GHS) undertaken as an organised programme in Japan.In 1996, all adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname City were invited by letter to attend a free GHS annually, conducted by the municipal cooperation and the medical and dental societies of Tokoname City. In the later years only those who attended in 1996 were reinvited. Females aged less than 39 years were also allowed to attend if they wished to participate in the GHS. The GHS consisted of completion of a self administered questionnaire to identify past and current illnesses and any medications used by the screened population coupled with a routine physical check, chest x ray, ECG, and blood and urine examination. The GHS was programmed annually during the years 1996 to 1998. All those attending the GHS were invited to participate in an OMS conducted under the same roof by a visiting dentist (n=37). A referral pathway was established for screen positives requiring follow up.A total of 19 305 subjects (5955 males, 13350 females; mean age 59.2 years; 7033 in 1996, 6289 in 1997, and 5983 in 1998) attended the GHS. Of those who attended the GHS, 19 056 (98.7%) attended the OMS (1.3% refused). This rate was fairly constant over the three years. Excluding repeat examinations, new cases recruited for OMS over the three years were 8723. Of those participating in OMS, 4269 (60.7%) attended all three years. In the cohorts examined, screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 5.4% in 1996, in 4.0% in 1997, and in 2.6% in 1998. Overall, this amounted to a positive detection rate of 4.1%, or 4.9% excluding repeat examinations. A higher prevalence of oral pre-cancer was recorded among male smokers.The overall results suggest that although compliance with attending a free GHS was low (26.2%) among Japanese subjects over 40 years of age, of those who complied 74-76% reattended annually. Hence a satisfactory participation rate can be obtained in Japan for OMS when this is coupled to a GHS conducted at the same visit.The application of acetic acid in the detection of oral squamous cell carcinoma.Oral cancer is the fourth most common cancer in males and the seventh most common cancer in females in Thailand. The survival rates and quality of life of oral cancer patients will significantly be improved if they receive treatment for lesions that are less advanced or premalignant. Early diagnosis is therefore of paramount importance. A number of techniques have been developed to supplement clinical examination for oral malignancy. One interesting screening method is the application of 3% to 5% acetic acid, which has been used for cervical cancer screening.The primary objective of this study was to assess the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using vinegar (5% acetic acid) for the examination of oral cancer. The secondary objective was to investigate the association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of the tumor marker, p53.The study included 30 participants suspected of having oral squamous cell carcinoma. Five percent acetic acid was applied to the lesions, followed by incisional biopsy. The specimens were microscopically examined for pathological diagnosis and p53 immunohistochemical investigation.The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using acetic acid for oral cancer examination were 83.33%, 84.21%, and 83.64%, respectively. There was a statistically significant association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of p53 protein (P = .000).The results of this study suggest that 5% acetic acid has high sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in detecting oral squamous cell carcinoma and might be used as an adjunct for oral cancer examination.Toluidine blue staining test for early detection of oral cancer: an adjunct to biopsy.Acetic acid wash and chemiluminescent illumination as an adjunct to conventional oral soft tissue examination for the detection of dysplasia: a pilot study.Population-based oral cancer screening appears to be a promising health promotion strategy (especially in high-risk individuals) with significant increases in quality-adjusted life years saved. However, the current protocol, conventional visual inspection, and palpation of oral soft tissues for the early detection of pre-malignant or malignant changes, appears to be deficient. The adjunctive application of technology to highlight such lesions may increase the diagnostic yield. The purpose of this pilot study was to collect data, which might support the hypothesis that oral soft tissues exhibit features similar to the cervical epithelium following an acetic acid wash and visual inspection under chemiluminescent illumination. The data provides strong evidence to support the hypothesis. Epithelium with hyperkeratinization, hyperparakeratinization, and/or chronic inflammatory infiltrate reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light more strongly and appears amplified. Similarly, epithelium with an altered nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio also reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light. In such cases, the lesions become clinically discernible and appear "acetowhite." Large-scale studies are required to further refine issues related to the selectivity and specificity of the technology.A comparison of two cytologic methods for mass screening against oral cancer.Use of methylene blue as a diagnostic aid in early detection of oral cancer and precancerous lesions.We assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive value of methylene blue staining in the diagnosis of oral cancer in 58 patients. The sensitivity was 90%, the specificity 69%, positive predictive value 74%, and negative predictive value 87%. Because of the number of false negatives and false positives we recommend that the diagnosis should always be confirmed by histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen. Methylene blue staining may, however, be useful as a screening tool for oral cancer in large, high-risk groups in a similar way to the more expensive toluidine blue.Efficacy of the ViziLite system in the identification of oral lesions.Early detection of oral cancer is crucial in improving survival rate. To improve early detection, the use of a dilute acetic acid rinse and observation under a chemiluminescent light (ViziLite; Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, AZ) has been recommended. However, to date, the contributions of the individual components of the system have not been studied. The present study was done to investigate the efficacy of the individual components of the ViziLite system in providing improved visualization of early oral mucosal lesions.A total of 100 patients, 39 males and 61 females, age 18 to 93 years (mean age, 44 years), who presented to the Virginia Commonwealth University School of Dentistry for dental screening were examined. There were 58 Caucasians, 29 African-Americans, 5 Hispanics, 6 Asians, and 2 of mixed ethnicity. Thirty-five patients smoked, 53 used alcohol, and 25 both smoked and drank. After written consent, the oral cavity was examined under incandescent light for soft tissue abnormalities. After 1-minute rinse with 1% acetic acid, the mouth was re-examined for additional mucosal abnormalities. Then, the mouth was examined once again using the ViziLite system's chemiluminescent light. Any lesions detected by these 3 examinations that were clinically undiagnosable were brush biopsied (Oral CDx) for determination of cellular representation.In the original examination of the 100 patients, 57 clinically diagnosable benign lesions (eg, linea alba, leukoedema) and 29 clinically undiagnosable lesions were detected. After the rinse, 6 additional diagnosable lesions (linea alba) and 3 undiagnosable lesions were found. No additional lesions were detected with the chemiluminescent light. Of the 32 undiagnosable lesions that were brush biopsied, 2 were positive for atypical cellular characterization and warranted further investigation with a scalpel biopsy. Neither of these lesions was found to be premalignant or malignant.Although the acid rinse accentuated some lesions, the overall detection rate was not significantly improved. The chemiluminescent light produced reflections that made visualization more difficult and thus was not beneficial.Annual screening for oral cancer detection.Most oral cancer and oral mucosal screening programs initiated in the past 20 years have been limited to a single examination of the population under study. Age specific, annual oral mucosal screening examination as a part of general health screening has been in operation in Tokonama city, Japan, from 1986. From 1996 the same target population aged 40 years and older has been invited for screening. The program coverage extended to 26% of the city population. During 1995-1998, out of 9536 attendees who participated in a general health and oral mucosal screening program in Tokoname city 6340 subjects (66.5%) re-attended at least for one further screening examination. There was no difference in the attendance for two annual mucosal examinations between male (67.0%) and female (66.2%) subjects. Three thousand nine hundred thirty-five subjects attended oral screening all 3 years (1996-1999) and the overall show-up rate for three consecutive examinations was 61%. During September-October 1996, 42 volunteer dentists carried out 6705 mouth examinations among those aged 40 years and older at the Municipal Center. One oral cancer was detected in 1996, in a subject free of any mucosal disease in the previous year. Among the screen-negative cases in 1996, 78% re-attended for screening in 1997 and 79% re-attended in the subsequent year. In the cohort that re-attended screening (1996-1998), oral mucosal pathology detected in three consecutive screenings included 18 leukoplakias, 24 with oral lichen planus and 343 other benign mucosal lesions. The number of subjects who complied to return and who remained disease-free over the 3-year period amounted to 3860, 59% of the disease-free subjects seen in 1996. A regular smoker was less likely to attend oral cancer screening in the three consecutive years of follow-up (odds ratio: 0.832, 95% CI 0.701-0.988). Satisfactory participation can be obtained for annual oral mucosal screening in Japan: this allows detection of new lesions, including oral cancer and leukoplakia (a surrogate marker of cancer risk). The number of new oral cancers detected in the program was too low to determine the optimal frequency for oral cancer screening but new oral leukoplakias were found on annual re-screening: the data indicate that the interval between two screens for this population should not be greater than 12 months.Opportunistic screening for oral cancer and precancer in general dental practice: results of a demonstration study.To demonstrate the feasibility of opportunistic oral cancer and precancer screening in general dental practice and to determine the prevalence of relevant lesions and risk habits in a population of general dental practice attenders.A prospective demonstration study, recruiting patients opportunistically.General dental practices.Eighteen general dental practitioners took part in this study. Each attended training sessions to be advised of the study protocol and the criteria of a positive and negative screen. Patients over the age of 35 years were prospectively and opportunistically recruited. Each patient was asked to complete a health questionnaire concerning age, gender, ethnicity, smoking and drinking habits. The dentist then examined the soft tissues and recorded the presence or absence of lesions independently on a second form. The forms were collated and data were analysed to determine prevalence of lesions and associations with risk habits.Data on 2,265 patients were available for analysis. Oral lesions were detected in 319 patients (14.1%). Ninety-four patients (4.2%) had lesions considered to be either malignant or potentially malignant. There was a significant association between positive lesions and male gender(IRR 1.86, 95% CI 1.22-2.82), heavy smoking (males: IRR 3.68, 95% Cl2.10-6.43: female; IRR 3.58, 954b CI 1.35-9.50) and heavy alcohol use in males (IRR 2.98, 95%q CI 1.06-3.47).The results suggest that patients attending general dental practices are representative of the general population both in terms of lesion prevalence and high risk habits such as smoking and drinking. This supports the view that opportunistic screening in a general dental practice setting may be a realistic alternative to population screening. Further research is needed to determine the cost effectiveness of this approach and to investigate the value of targeting high risk groups within this population. General dental practice is ideal for the evaluation of such systems prior to extending these studies to other healthcare settings.Evaluation of a screening test for the early detection of oral cancer and precancer.The purpose of this study was to establish the sensitivity and specificity of a clinical examination for the detection of early oral cancer and precancer. A screening programme was conducted over a period of one year and 2027 subjects aged 40 years and over were examined. Screening took place at two sites; opportunistically in outpatient departments at a dental hospital and by postal invitation at an inner city medical practice. The screening procedure included a questionnaire on habits and an oral examination by two independent dentists. The first examining dentist (the screener) was either a general dental practitioner, a community dental officer or a junior hospital dentist. There were 24 dentists in the screener group. A second single examining dentist (a specialist) provided the definitive diagnosis, or 'gold standard', with which the screeners' results were compared. A screen was defined as positive if a white patch, a red patch, or an ulcer of longer than two weeks duration was detected. Each subject was categorised as either positive or negative by both the screener and the specialist. The screener and specialist were unaware of each other's findings. The prevalence of disease according to the specialist was 2.7 per cent. The results for all 24 screeners were pooled and gave an overall sensitivity of 0.74 (95 per cent CI, 0.62 to 0.86), specificity of 0.99 (95 per cent CI, 0.985-0.994) and positive and negative predictive values of 0.67 and 0.99 respectively.Oral cancer screening in a high-risk underserved community--Vancouver Downtown Eastside.The objective of this study was to evaluate a clinic-centered oral cancer screening initiative in one of the poorest communities in Canada, assessing the need for screening and the acceptance of screening and identifying hindrances to both screening and follow-up. The study group included 204 people in the Vancouver Downtown Eastside (DTES). This was shown to be a high-risk community based on risk factors, lack of access to care, and the high frequency of oral mucosal anomalies. Acceptance of screening was high (98%); however, acceptance of biopsy for abnormal findings and follow-up was low. Among the 12 patients with clinical leukoplakia who were biopsied, 10 showed cancer or precancer. In summary, these data show a need for screening in this population and an ability to recruit patients to screening. They support a future expansion of this initiative to create a more comprehensive strategy for outreach to this underserved community that extends to screening, diagnostic work-up, and treatment.Detection of oral cancer using basic health workers in an area of high oral cancer incidence in India.In the rural health care delivery system in India, basic health workers (BHW) go house-to-house to help in the preventive and therapeutic measures of certain diseases. Some 53 BHW were trained by the dentists of the research team for examining the oral cavity of high-risk individuals and categorizing them into normals or those with referable or nonreferable lesions. Referable lesions comprised nodular leukoplakia, submucous fibrosis, and ulcers and growths suggestive of oral cancer. In a 1-year period, 39,331 high-risk individuals were examined by BHW and 523 (1.3%) were referred for further diagnosis. Some 72% arrived at the referral center and 20 oral cancers were confirmed among these individuals. Reexamination in the field by the dentists was conducted for 5% of the sample to obtain sensitivity and specificity estimates of BHW diagnosis. The findings indicate that incorporation of an oral cancer detection program in the existing health care infrastructure is feasible and beneficial.Interim results from a cluster randomized controlled oral cancer screening trial in Kerala, India.A cluster randomized controlled oral cancer screening trial is on-going in the Trivandrum district, India, to evaluate the efficacy of screening in reducing oral cancer mortality. Subjects, aged 35 years and above, in 13 clusters in the Trivandrum district, India, were randomized to the intervention (screening) group (7 clusters, 78969 subjects) to receive three rounds of screening by oral visual inspection by trained health workers at 3-year intervals or to a control group (6 clusters, 74739 subjects). Two rounds of screening were completed between 1995 and 2002 during which 69896 (88.5%) subjects were screened at least once, and 59.7% of the 4408 screen-positive subjects were further investigated. In the intervention group, 344404 person-years were accrued and 329326 person-years were in the control group. In the intervention group, 149 incident oral cancer cases and 65 deaths from oral cancer were observed, and 106 incident cases and 62 deaths from oral cancer were observed in the control group. The programme sensitivity for detection of oral precancerous lesions and cancer was 81.5% and the programme specificity was 84.8%; the programme positive predictive value was 39.6%. In the intervention group 37.6% of the cases were in stages I-II, as opposed to 18.9% in the control group. The 3 year survival rate was 57.5% in the intervention and 38.8% in the control group (P<0.05). The age standardized oral cancer mortality rates were 21.2/100000 person-years in the intervention and 21.3/100000 in the control group. After completing two rounds of screening, oral cancer mortality rates were similar in both study groups.Annual screening for oral cancer and precancer by invitation to 60-year-old residents of a city in Japan.Since 1986, annual screening for oral cancer and precancer by postal invitation has been undertaken among 60-year-old residents of Tokoname city, Japan. Clinical examination of the oral soft tissues is performed by groups of four different, specially trained general dental practitioners in the city health centre on one day each year. Following screening each subject receives an individual consultation with an oral medicine specialist. Individuals considered to need full diagnostic follow up or treatment are advised to attend a secondary care referral facility. Between 1986 and 1993, 802 out of 5187 eligible residents (15.5 per cent) were screened of whom 38 (4.7 per cent) were designated by the screeners as positive for oral cancer, erythroplakia, leukoplakia, lichen planus or chronic candidosis. Of these, 32 were referred and 25 attended for follow up examination in hospital departments by specialists with full diagnostic back up facilities. Twenty subjects were confirmed as having a potentially malignant lesion. For these referred patients only, the proportion of correct decisions by the screeners out of all oral cancer/precancer screening decisions was 81 per cent. Positive and negative predictive values for those attending for follow up were 0.80 and 0.82 respectively. Ways of improving the effectiveness and adequacy of the programme are considered.Outcome following a population screening programme for oral cancer and precancer in Japan.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the validity and outcome of an oral mucosal screening programme conducted in Japan. All adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname city were invited by letter to attend a free general health screen and oral examinations annually. Twenty- to 39-year-old females were also encouraged to participate. During the years 1996-98, a total of 19056 subjects (5885 male, 13171 female: mean age 60.7+/-11.3 years) were examined by three types of screeners: postgraduate dental residents (n=17), hospital dentists (n=5) and general dental practitioners (n=15). In the cohorts examined screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 783 (4.1%) subjects. Of those detected with mucosal lesions, 200 (25.5%) were referred and 137 (68. 5%) attended for follow up examination in hospital departments by specialists with full diagnostic back up facilities. Thirty-nine subjects were confirmed as having oral cancer or precancer (two squamous cell carcinomas, 37 leukoplakias) and 40 with lichen planus. Five false positives (3.6%) were found. Among the cases referred under other diagnostic labels no cancers were detected. Among those who attended for confirmation of oral cancer or precancer by a specialist, sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value were 0.92, 0.64 and 0.78, respectively. In males with oral cancer/leukoplakia, the prevalence of smoking, drinking and combined habits was higher than those with lichen planus or among negative subjects. The sensitivity and specificity determined from this research suggests that the performance of the Japanese dentists employed in screening was satisfactory. An attendance of 68% for re-examination by specialists compares well with other reported studies measuring patient compliance.[Model program for screening oral cancers in the Roma population].Oral cancer has been identified as a significant public health threat. It is reported that about 3,800 new cases of oral cancer are diagnosed in Hungary each year with approximately 1,700 associated deaths. Oral cancer is the 6th most common cancer in men. Most oral cancers are preventable; 75% of oral cancers are related to tobacco use, alcohol use, or use of both substances together. While there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of visual examination as a method of screening for oral cancer in the general population, screening in high-risk populations is highly recommended. It was presumed that high-risk behavior including tobacco and alcohol use is one of the characteristics of Roma people. The main aim of the study was to elaborate a screening model program for the Roma population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. In the program we planned to survey the risk factors in the target population, establish the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer and direct the patients to health care facilities. First we determined the target population in four Hungarian towns with the help of Roma social workers and local public health officers. We assembled a questionnaire on risk factors. Training for Roma social workers and screening personnel was also accomplished. Screening for oral precancerous lesions and cancer and survey the risk factors in the target population were performed at the same time. Patients screened to be positive were referred to specialists. Altogether 1,146 persons, 656 male and 490 female (age 20-77 years, mean 40 years), participated in the screening; 84% of them reported on some kind of complaints. We have got valid data on risk factors in connection with oral cancer. More than fifty percent of participants did not clean their teeth regularly, 75% were smokers, while 45% drunk alcohol regularly. 1,6% of screened participants had oral lesions that did not require referral to a specialist, while 2.3% of the screened subjects had referable oral mucosal lesions including leukoplakia. The overwhelming majority (93%) of participants screened to be positive did not see dentist regularly. As a conclusion, we elaborated a screening model program, which is applicable for disadvantaged (e.g. Roma) population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. We surveyed the risk factors in the target population, established the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer lesions and directed the patients to care facilities. We also assisted them to get appropriate long-term care and follow-up. The importance of screening activities targeted on high-risk population was underlined.Reproducibility of an oral cancer and precancer detection program using a primary health care model in Sri Lanka.A pilot feasibility study utilizing primary health care workers (PHCW) in the early detection of oral cancer and precancer was reported in 1984. The present study was to assess the reproducibility of this model in a different geographic area using existing Government Health Services. In order to improve the compliance of individual referrals following detection (54% in the previous study) a simultaneous health education program was mounted. Of 72,867 villagers aged 20 years and over who were allocated for screening, 57,124 (78%) were examined during 1 year by 36 PHCWs. Oral lesions were detected in 3559 (6.2%). Of these, 2193 (62%) complied by presenting for a reexamination at the hospital. Twenty new cancers and 1716 subjects with oral precancerous lesions were confirmed. While the population screening coverage achieved was higher than in the feasibility study, compliance was marginally improved. Noteworthy, however, was the detection of 20 new cancers as compared to 4 in the feasibility study. This primary health care model for cancer detection appears to be organizationally feasible for a developing country.Toludine blue test for detection of carcinoma of the oral cavity: an evaluation.Oral cancer screening as an integral part of general health screening in Tokoname City, Japan.To measure the attendance and compliance rates in oral mucosal screening (OMS) offered as part of a general health screen (GHS) undertaken as an organised programme in Japan.In 1996, all adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname City were invited by letter to attend a free GHS annually, conducted by the municipal cooperation and the medical and dental societies of Tokoname City. In the later years only those who attended in 1996 were reinvited. Females aged less than 39 years were also allowed to attend if they wished to participate in the GHS. The GHS consisted of completion of a self administered questionnaire to identify past and current illnesses and any medications used by the screened population coupled with a routine physical check, chest x ray, ECG, and blood and urine examination. The GHS was programmed annually during the years 1996 to 1998. All those attending the GHS were invited to participate in an OMS conducted under the same roof by a visiting dentist (n=37). A referral pathway was established for screen positives requiring follow up.A total of 19 305 subjects (5955 males, 13350 females; mean age 59.2 years; 7033 in 1996, 6289 in 1997, and 5983 in 1998) attended the GHS. Of those who attended the GHS, 19 056 (98.7%) attended the OMS (1.3% refused). This rate was fairly constant over the three years. Excluding repeat examinations, new cases recruited for OMS over the three years were 8723. Of those participating in OMS, 4269 (60.7%) attended all three years. In the cohorts examined, screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 5.4% in 1996, in 4.0% in 1997, and in 2.6% in 1998. Overall, this amounted to a positive detection rate of 4.1%, or 4.9% excluding repeat examinations. A higher prevalence of oral pre-cancer was recorded among male smokers.The overall results suggest that although compliance with attending a free GHS was low (26.2%) among Japanese subjects over 40 years of age, of those who complied 74-76% reattended annually. Hence a satisfactory participation rate can be obtained in Japan for OMS when this is coupled to a GHS conducted at the same visit.Reproducibility and validity of oral visual inspection by trained health workers in the detection of oral precancer and cancer.A randomized intervention trial is in progress in Kerala, India, to evaluate the effectiveness of oral visual inspection by trained health workers (HWs) in the prevention of oral cancer. Fourteen health workers with college graduation as the basic qualification were trained in oral visual inspection to identify oral cancers and precancers among the participants of the screening trial and to refer them for further confirmation and management. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the reproducibility and validity of the screening test provided by the health worker against the reference oral visual findings of three physicians. A total of 2069 subjects who had already been examined were re-examined by the health workers and physicians. The sensitivity and the specificity of the oral visual inspection were 94.3% and 99.3% respectively. There was moderate agreement between the findings of the initial and the repeat mouth examinations carried out by the health workers, which were on average 6 months apart. There was almost perfect agreement (kappa = 0.85) between the findings of the health workers and the physicians in identifying the different types of oral precancerous lesions. The findings of our study indicate that it is possible to train resource persons to perform the oral cancer screening test as accurately as doctors, although experience appears to be a crucial component of health workers' accuracy. The efficacy of such an approach to reduce the incidence of and mortality from oral cancer, however, remains to be proven.Early findings from a community-based, cluster-randomized, controlled oral cancer screening trial in Kerala, India. The Trivandrum Oral Cancer Screening Study Group.Oral cancer satisfies the criteria for a suitable disease for screening, and oral visual inspection is a suitable test for oral cancer screening. The efficacy of screening in reducing mortality from oral cancer has not yet been evaluated. The authors describe a cluster-randomized, controlled oral cancer screening trial in southern India and its early results.Apparently healthy subjects age 35 years or older in 13 clusters called panchayaths were randomized to either an intervention group (n = 7) or a control group (n = 6). Subjects in the intervention group will receive 3 rounds of screening consisting of oral visual inspection by trained health workers at 3-year intervals. The first round of screening was carried out between October 1995 and May 1998. Participants were visited in their homes and interviewed for sociodemographic details, tobacco-smoking and alcohol-drinking habits, and personal medical history. Those with tobacco or alcohol habits were advised to stop those habits. Subjects in the intervention group were offered screening, and those with lesions suggestive of oral leukoplakia, submucous fibrosis, or oral cancer were referred for examination by physicians. Confirmed leukoplakias were excised whenever possible, others were kept on follow-up, and those with confirmed oral cancers were referred for treatment. Data on oral cancer incidence, stage distribution, survival, and mortality in the study groups are obtained by record linkage with the Trivandrum population-based cancer registry and municipal death registration systems.There were 59,894 eligible subjects in the intervention group and 54,707 in the control group; 31.4% of the former group reported no tobacco or alcohol habits, compared with 44.1% of the latter. The distribution of age, education, occupation, income, and socioeconomic status were similar in the two groups. Of 3585 subjects in the intervention group referred, 52.4% were examined by physicians; 36 subjects with oral cancers and 1310 with oral precancers were diagnosed. Of the 63 oral cancers recorded in the cancer registry, 47 were in the intervention group and 16 were in the control group, yielding incidence rates of 56.1 and 20.3 per 100,000 person-years in the intervention and control groups, respectively. The program sensitivity for detection of oral cancer was 76.6% and the specificity 76.2%; the positive predictive value was 1.0% for oral cancer. In the intervention group, 72.3% of the cases were in Stages I-II, as opposed to 12.5% in the control group. The 3-year case fatality rates were 14.9% (7 of 47 patients) in the intervention group and 56.3% (9 of 16 patients) in the control group.Though compliance with referral for confirmatory examination in the first round was lower than the 70% anticipated, intermediate end points, such as stage at diagnosis and case fatality, indicate that the trial is making fairly satisfactory progress.The application of acetic acid in the detection of oral squamous cell carcinoma.Oral cancer is the fourth most common cancer in males and the seventh most common cancer in females in Thailand. The survival rates and quality of life of oral cancer patients will significantly be improved if they receive treatment for lesions that are less advanced or premalignant. Early diagnosis is therefore of paramount importance. A number of techniques have been developed to supplement clinical examination for oral malignancy. One interesting screening method is the application of 3% to 5% acetic acid, which has been used for cervical cancer screening.The primary objective of this study was to assess the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using vinegar (5% acetic acid) for the examination of oral cancer. The secondary objective was to investigate the association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of the tumor marker, p53.The study included 30 participants suspected of having oral squamous cell carcinoma. Five percent acetic acid was applied to the lesions, followed by incisional biopsy. The specimens were microscopically examined for pathological diagnosis and p53 immunohistochemical investigation.The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using acetic acid for oral cancer examination were 83.33%, 84.21%, and 83.64%, respectively. There was a statistically significant association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of p53 protein (P = .000).The results of this study suggest that 5% acetic acid has high sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in detecting oral squamous cell carcinoma and might be used as an adjunct for oral cancer examination.Toluidine blue staining test for early detection of oral cancer: an adjunct to biopsy.Acetic acid wash and chemiluminescent illumination as an adjunct to conventional oral soft tissue examination for the detection of dysplasia: a pilot study.Population-based oral cancer screening appears to be a promising health promotion strategy (especially in high-risk individuals) with significant increases in quality-adjusted life years saved. However, the current protocol, conventional visual inspection, and palpation of oral soft tissues for the early detection of pre-malignant or malignant changes, appears to be deficient. The adjunctive application of technology to highlight such lesions may increase the diagnostic yield. The purpose of this pilot study was to collect data, which might support the hypothesis that oral soft tissues exhibit features similar to the cervical epithelium following an acetic acid wash and visual inspection under chemiluminescent illumination. The data provides strong evidence to support the hypothesis. Epithelium with hyperkeratinization, hyperparakeratinization, and/or chronic inflammatory infiltrate reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light more strongly and appears amplified. Similarly, epithelium with an altered nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio also reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light. In such cases, the lesions become clinically discernible and appear "acetowhite." Large-scale studies are required to further refine issues related to the selectivity and specificity of the technology.A comparison of two cytologic methods for mass screening against oral cancer.Use of methylene blue as a diagnostic aid in early detection of oral cancer and precancerous lesions.We assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive value of methylene blue staining in the diagnosis of oral cancer in 58 patients. The sensitivity was 90%, the specificity 69%, positive predictive value 74%, and negative predictive value 87%. Because of the number of false negatives and false positives we recommend that the diagnosis should always be confirmed by histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen. Methylene blue staining may, however, be useful as a screening tool for oral cancer in large, high-risk groups in a similar way to the more expensive toluidine blue.Reliability of oral precancer screening by primary health care workers in Sri Lanka.The accuracy of the field diagnosis is of crucial importance in the successful implementation of a screening programme. In Sri Lanka, the feasibility of using primary health care workers for oral cancer and precancer screening was pilot tested between 1980 and 1982. This paper analyses in detail the categories of false positives referred and the false negatives detected following screening. Among 660 subjects who arrived at the referral centre following screening, 64 (10 per cent) had no apparent oral lesion. The predictive value determined in this study was 58 per cent for a referrable lesion and 98 per cent for non referrable cases.Utilization of primary health care workers for early detection of oral cancer and precancer cases in Sri Lanka.Oral cancer presents a serious public health problem in south-east Asian countries. In Sri Lanka and India 35-40% of all cancers are reported to be oral cancers, which are curable if detected in the early stages. The idea that, in developing countries, one of the few practical approaches to early detection of these cases could be through the utilization of primary health care workers was tested in a field study carried out in Sri Lanka. In a control area the subjects with oral lesions were identified by medical/dental officers. In the study, 34 primary health care workers were able, alongside their routine duties, to examine the oral cavity of 28 295 subjects during a period of 52 weeks; 1220 subjects were detected with lesions needing re-examination. The performance of these primary health care workers was very satisfactory in terms of the number of cases detected and the accuracy of their diagnoses, which were verified by re-examination at a specially designated referral centre. The clinical diagnoses of the three categories of lesions detected were as follows: stage 1 lesions for observation (homogeneous or ulcerated leukoplakia), stage 2 lesions for investigation (speckled leukoplakia, erythroplakia, or submucous fibrosis), and stage 3 lesions for treatment (cancer). There was 89% correspondence between the stage 1-3 diagnoses by the health workers and the clinical diagnoses made at the referral centre. However, compliance by patients was low because only 50% of the cases detected in the field attended the referral centre. The cost-effectiveness of this approach to cancer control has been demonstrated.Efficacy of the ViziLite system in the identification of oral lesions.Early detection of oral cancer is crucial in improving survival rate. To improve early detection, the use of a dilute acetic acid rinse and observation under a chemiluminescent light (ViziLite; Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, AZ) has been recommended. However, to date, the contributions of the individual components of the system have not been studied. The present study was done to investigate the efficacy of the individual components of the ViziLite system in providing improved visualization of early oral mucosal lesions.A total of 100 patients, 39 males and 61 females, age 18 to 93 years (mean age, 44 years), who presented to the Virginia Commonwealth University School of Dentistry for dental screening were examined. There were 58 Caucasians, 29 African-Americans, 5 Hispanics, 6 Asians, and 2 of mixed ethnicity. Thirty-five patients smoked, 53 used alcohol, and 25 both smoked and drank. After written consent, the oral cavity was examined under incandescent light for soft tissue abnormalities. After 1-minute rinse with 1% acetic acid, the mouth was re-examined for additional mucosal abnormalities. Then, the mouth was examined once again using the ViziLite system's chemiluminescent light. Any lesions detected by these 3 examinations that were clinically undiagnosable were brush biopsied (Oral CDx) for determination of cellular representation.In the original examination of the 100 patients, 57 clinically diagnosable benign lesions (eg, linea alba, leukoedema) and 29 clinically undiagnosable lesions were detected. After the rinse, 6 additional diagnosable lesions (linea alba) and 3 undiagnosable lesions were found. No additional lesions were detected with the chemiluminescent light. Of the 32 undiagnosable lesions that were brush biopsied, 2 were positive for atypical cellular characterization and warranted further investigation with a scalpel biopsy. Neither of these lesions was found to be premalignant or malignant.Although the acid rinse accentuated some lesions, the overall detection rate was not significantly improved. The chemiluminescent light produced reflections that made visualization more difficult and thus was not beneficial.Annual screening for oral cancer detection.Most oral cancer and oral mucosal screening programs initiated in the past 20 years have been limited to a single examination of the population under study. Age specific, annual oral mucosal screening examination as a part of general health screening has been in operation in Tokonama city, Japan, from 1986. From 1996 the same target population aged 40 years and older has been invited for screening. The program coverage extended to 26% of the city population. During 1995-1998, out of 9536 attendees who participated in a general health and oral mucosal screening program in Tokoname city 6340 subjects (66.5%) re-attended at least for one further screening examination. There was no difference in the attendance for two annual mucosal examinations between male (67.0%) and female (66.2%) subjects. Three thousand nine hundred thirty-five subjects attended oral screening all 3 years (1996-1999) and the overall show-up rate for three consecutive examinations was 61%. During September-October 1996, 42 volunteer dentists carried out 6705 mouth examinations among those aged 40 years and older at the Municipal Center. One oral cancer was detected in 1996, in a subject free of any mucosal disease in the previous year. Among the screen-negative cases in 1996, 78% re-attended for screening in 1997 and 79% re-attended in the subsequent year. In the cohort that re-attended screening (1996-1998), oral mucosal pathology detected in three consecutive screenings included 18 leukoplakias, 24 with oral lichen planus and 343 other benign mucosal lesions. The number of subjects who complied to return and who remained disease-free over the 3-year period amounted to 3860, 59% of the disease-free subjects seen in 1996. A regular smoker was less likely to attend oral cancer screening in the three consecutive years of follow-up (odds ratio: 0.832, 95% CI 0.701-0.988). Satisfactory participation can be obtained for annual oral mucosal screening in Japan: this allows detection of new lesions, including oral cancer and leukoplakia (a surrogate marker of cancer risk). The number of new oral cancers detected in the program was too low to determine the optimal frequency for oral cancer screening but new oral leukoplakias were found on annual re-screening: the data indicate that the interval between two screens for this population should not be greater than 12 months.Opportunistic screening for oral cancer and precancer in general dental practice: results of a demonstration study.To demonstrate the feasibility of opportunistic oral cancer and precancer screening in general dental practice and to determine the prevalence of relevant lesions and risk habits in a population of general dental practice attenders.A prospective demonstration study, recruiting patients opportunistically.General dental practices.Eighteen general dental practitioners took part in this study. Each attended training sessions to be advised of the study protocol and the criteria of a positive and negative screen. Patients over the age of 35 years were prospectively and opportunistically recruited. Each patient was asked to complete a health questionnaire concerning age, gender, ethnicity, smoking and drinking habits. The dentist then examined the soft tissues and recorded the presence or absence of lesions independently on a second form. The forms were collated and data were analysed to determine prevalence of lesions and associations with risk habits.Data on 2,265 patients were available for analysis. Oral lesions were detected in 319 patients (14.1%). Ninety-four patients (4.2%) had lesions considered to be either malignant or potentially malignant. There was a significant association between positive lesions and male gender(IRR 1.86, 95% CI 1.22-2.82), heavy smoking (males: IRR 3.68, 95% Cl2.10-6.43: female; IRR 3.58, 954b CI 1.35-9.50) and heavy alcohol use in males (IRR 2.98, 95%q CI 1.06-3.47).The results suggest that patients attending general dental practices are representative of the general population both in terms of lesion prevalence and high risk habits such as smoking and drinking. This supports the view that opportunistic screening in a general dental practice setting may be a realistic alternative to population screening. Further research is needed to determine the cost effectiveness of this approach and to investigate the value of targeting high risk groups within this population. General dental practice is ideal for the evaluation of such systems prior to extending these studies to other healthcare settings.Evaluation of screening for oral cancer and precancer in a company headquarters.Oral cancer and precancer appear to fulfil many of the criteria for a disease suitable for mass screening. Several commercial organisations in the UK have introduced screening for their employees. One program has been formally evaluated over the course of 1 yr. Of 553 company headquarters staff aged > or = 40 yr, 292 (53%) responded to the well-publicised screening invitation and received a simple clinical examination of the oral mucosa from one of two company dentists. In addition, 17 staff were screened from a separate company work-site. After screening, subjects were examined independently by an oral medicine specialist with access to the relevant diagnostic aids. The dentists' screening decisions were validated against the specialist's definitive diagnoses (the 'gold standard'). The true prevalence of subjects with lesions diagnosed as positive (white patch, red patch or ulcer of greater than 2 weeks' duration) was 17 (5.5%). Overall, sensitivity was 0.71 and specificity, 0.99. The compliance rate to screening among headquarters subjects in seven occupational categories did not differ significantly from the occupational profile for all headquarters personnel. Estimates of relative risk of a positive diagnosis were calculated by logistic regression for five independent variables; gender, age, moderate smoking, heavy smoking, and smoking combined with greater than low risk alcohol consumption. Only heavy smoking (> or = 20 cigarettes per day) produced a significant odds ratio (3.43, P < 0.05).Evaluation of a screening test for the early detection of oral cancer and precancer.The purpose of this study was to establish the sensitivity and specificity of a clinical examination for the detection of early oral cancer and precancer. A screening programme was conducted over a period of one year and 2027 subjects aged 40 years and over were examined. Screening took place at two sites; opportunistically in outpatient departments at a dental hospital and by postal invitation at an inner city medical practice. The screening procedure included a questionnaire on habits and an oral examination by two independent dentists. The first examining dentist (the screener) was either a general dental practitioner, a community dental officer or a junior hospital dentist. There were 24 dentists in the screener group. A second single examining dentist (a specialist) provided the definitive diagnosis, or 'gold standard', with which the screeners' results were compared. A screen was defined as positive if a white patch, a red patch, or an ulcer of longer than two weeks duration was detected. Each subject was categorised as either positive or negative by both the screener and the specialist. The screener and specialist were unaware of each other's findings. The prevalence of disease according to the specialist was 2.7 per cent. The results for all 24 screeners were pooled and gave an overall sensitivity of 0.74 (95 per cent CI, 0.62 to 0.86), specificity of 0.99 (95 per cent CI, 0.985-0.994) and positive and negative predictive values of 0.67 and 0.99 respectively.Oral cancer screening in a high-risk underserved community--Vancouver Downtown Eastside.The objective of this study was to evaluate a clinic-centered oral cancer screening initiative in one of the poorest communities in Canada, assessing the need for screening and the acceptance of screening and identifying hindrances to both screening and follow-up. The study group included 204 people in the Vancouver Downtown Eastside (DTES). This was shown to be a high-risk community based on risk factors, lack of access to care, and the high frequency of oral mucosal anomalies. Acceptance of screening was high (98%); however, acceptance of biopsy for abnormal findings and follow-up was low. Among the 12 patients with clinical leukoplakia who were biopsied, 10 showed cancer or precancer. In summary, these data show a need for screening in this population and an ability to recruit patients to screening. They support a future expansion of this initiative to create a more comprehensive strategy for outreach to this underserved community that extends to screening, diagnostic work-up, and treatment.Detection of oral cancer using basic health workers in an area of high oral cancer incidence in India.In the rural health care delivery system in India, basic health workers (BHW) go house-to-house to help in the preventive and therapeutic measures of certain diseases. Some 53 BHW were trained by the dentists of the research team for examining the oral cavity of high-risk individuals and categorizing them into normals or those with referable or nonreferable lesions. Referable lesions comprised nodular leukoplakia, submucous fibrosis, and ulcers and growths suggestive of oral cancer. In a 1-year period, 39,331 high-risk individuals were examined by BHW and 523 (1.3%) were referred for further diagnosis. Some 72% arrived at the referral center and 20 oral cancers were confirmed among these individuals. Reexamination in the field by the dentists was conducted for 5% of the sample to obtain sensitivity and specificity estimates of BHW diagnosis. The findings indicate that incorporation of an oral cancer detection program in the existing health care infrastructure is feasible and beneficial.Interim results from a cluster randomized controlled oral cancer screening trial in Kerala, India.A cluster randomized controlled oral cancer screening trial is on-going in the Trivandrum district, India, to evaluate the efficacy of screening in reducing oral cancer mortality. Subjects, aged 35 years and above, in 13 clusters in the Trivandrum district, India, were randomized to the intervention (screening) group (7 clusters, 78969 subjects) to receive three rounds of screening by oral visual inspection by trained health workers at 3-year intervals or to a control group (6 clusters, 74739 subjects). Two rounds of screening were completed between 1995 and 2002 during which 69896 (88.5%) subjects were screened at least once, and 59.7% of the 4408 screen-positive subjects were further investigated. In the intervention group, 344404 person-years were accrued and 329326 person-years were in the control group. In the intervention group, 149 incident oral cancer cases and 65 deaths from oral cancer were observed, and 106 incident cases and 62 deaths from oral cancer were observed in the control group. The programme sensitivity for detection of oral precancerous lesions and cancer was 81.5% and the programme specificity was 84.8%; the programme positive predictive value was 39.6%. In the intervention group 37.6% of the cases were in stages I-II, as opposed to 18.9% in the control group. The 3 year survival rate was 57.5% in the intervention and 38.8% in the control group (P<0.05). The age standardized oral cancer mortality rates were 21.2/100000 person-years in the intervention and 21.3/100000 in the control group. After completing two rounds of screening, oral cancer mortality rates were similar in both study groups.Annual screening for oral cancer and precancer by invitation to 60-year-old residents of a city in Japan.Since 1986, annual screening for oral cancer and precancer by postal invitation has been undertaken among 60-year-old residents of Tokoname city, Japan. Clinical examination of the oral soft tissues is performed by groups of four different, specially trained general dental practitioners in the city health centre on one day each year. Following screening each subject receives an individual consultation with an oral medicine specialist. Individuals considered to need full diagnostic follow up or treatment are advised to attend a secondary care referral facility. Between 1986 and 1993, 802 out of 5187 eligible residents (15.5 per cent) were screened of whom 38 (4.7 per cent) were designated by the screeners as positive for oral cancer, erythroplakia, leukoplakia, lichen planus or chronic candidosis. Of these, 32 were referred and 25 attended for follow up examination in hospital departments by specialists with full diagnostic back up facilities. Twenty subjects were confirmed as having a potentially malignant lesion. For these referred patients only, the proportion of correct decisions by the screeners out of all oral cancer/precancer screening decisions was 81 per cent. Positive and negative predictive values for those attending for follow up were 0.80 and 0.82 respectively. Ways of improving the effectiveness and adequacy of the programme are considered.Outcome following a population screening programme for oral cancer and precancer in Japan.The purpose of this study was to evaluate the validity and outcome of an oral mucosal screening programme conducted in Japan. All adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname city were invited by letter to attend a free general health screen and oral examinations annually. Twenty- to 39-year-old females were also encouraged to participate. During the years 1996-98, a total of 19056 subjects (5885 male, 13171 female: mean age 60.7+/-11.3 years) were examined by three types of screeners: postgraduate dental residents (n=17), hospital dentists (n=5) and general dental practitioners (n=15). In the cohorts examined screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 783 (4.1%) subjects. Of those detected with mucosal lesions, 200 (25.5%) were referred and 137 (68. 5%) attended for follow up examination in hospital departments by specialists with full diagnostic back up facilities. Thirty-nine subjects were confirmed as having oral cancer or precancer (two squamous cell carcinomas, 37 leukoplakias) and 40 with lichen planus. Five false positives (3.6%) were found. Among the cases referred under other diagnostic labels no cancers were detected. Among those who attended for confirmation of oral cancer or precancer by a specialist, sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value were 0.92, 0.64 and 0.78, respectively. In males with oral cancer/leukoplakia, the prevalence of smoking, drinking and combined habits was higher than those with lichen planus or among negative subjects. The sensitivity and specificity determined from this research suggests that the performance of the Japanese dentists employed in screening was satisfactory. An attendance of 68% for re-examination by specialists compares well with other reported studies measuring patient compliance.[Model program for screening oral cancers in the Roma population].Oral cancer has been identified as a significant public health threat. It is reported that about 3,800 new cases of oral cancer are diagnosed in Hungary each year with approximately 1,700 associated deaths. Oral cancer is the 6th most common cancer in men. Most oral cancers are preventable; 75% of oral cancers are related to tobacco use, alcohol use, or use of both substances together. While there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of visual examination as a method of screening for oral cancer in the general population, screening in high-risk populations is highly recommended. It was presumed that high-risk behavior including tobacco and alcohol use is one of the characteristics of Roma people. The main aim of the study was to elaborate a screening model program for the Roma population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. In the program we planned to survey the risk factors in the target population, establish the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer and direct the patients to health care facilities. First we determined the target population in four Hungarian towns with the help of Roma social workers and local public health officers. We assembled a questionnaire on risk factors. Training for Roma social workers and screening personnel was also accomplished. Screening for oral precancerous lesions and cancer and survey the risk factors in the target population were performed at the same time. Patients screened to be positive were referred to specialists. Altogether 1,146 persons, 656 male and 490 female (age 20-77 years, mean 40 years), participated in the screening; 84% of them reported on some kind of complaints. We have got valid data on risk factors in connection with oral cancer. More than fifty percent of participants did not clean their teeth regularly, 75% were smokers, while 45% drunk alcohol regularly. 1,6% of screened participants had oral lesions that did not require referral to a specialist, while 2.3% of the screened subjects had referable oral mucosal lesions including leukoplakia. The overwhelming majority (93%) of participants screened to be positive did not see dentist regularly. As a conclusion, we elaborated a screening model program, which is applicable for disadvantaged (e.g. Roma) population to determine risk factors of oral cancer and establish early diagnosis hence to reduce morbidity and mortality. We surveyed the risk factors in the target population, established the diagnosis of oral cancer and/or pre-cancer lesions and directed the patients to care facilities. We also assisted them to get appropriate long-term care and follow-up. The importance of screening activities targeted on high-risk population was underlined.Reproducibility of an oral cancer and precancer detection program using a primary health care model in Sri Lanka.A pilot feasibility study utilizing primary health care workers (PHCW) in the early detection of oral cancer and precancer was reported in 1984. The present study was to assess the reproducibility of this model in a different geographic area using existing Government Health Services. In order to improve the compliance of individual referrals following detection (54% in the previous study) a simultaneous health education program was mounted. Of 72,867 villagers aged 20 years and over who were allocated for screening, 57,124 (78%) were examined during 1 year by 36 PHCWs. Oral lesions were detected in 3559 (6.2%). Of these, 2193 (62%) complied by presenting for a reexamination at the hospital. Twenty new cancers and 1716 subjects with oral precancerous lesions were confirmed. While the population screening coverage achieved was higher than in the feasibility study, compliance was marginally improved. Noteworthy, however, was the detection of 20 new cancers as compared to 4 in the feasibility study. This primary health care model for cancer detection appears to be organizationally feasible for a developing country.Toludine blue test for detection of carcinoma of the oral cavity: an evaluation.Oral cancer screening as an integral part of general health screening in Tokoname City, Japan.To measure the attendance and compliance rates in oral mucosal screening (OMS) offered as part of a general health screen (GHS) undertaken as an organised programme in Japan.In 1996, all adults over the age of 40 years resident in Tokoname City were invited by letter to attend a free GHS annually, conducted by the municipal cooperation and the medical and dental societies of Tokoname City. In the later years only those who attended in 1996 were reinvited. Females aged less than 39 years were also allowed to attend if they wished to participate in the GHS. The GHS consisted of completion of a self administered questionnaire to identify past and current illnesses and any medications used by the screened population coupled with a routine physical check, chest x ray, ECG, and blood and urine examination. The GHS was programmed annually during the years 1996 to 1998. All those attending the GHS were invited to participate in an OMS conducted under the same roof by a visiting dentist (n=37). A referral pathway was established for screen positives requiring follow up.A total of 19 305 subjects (5955 males, 13350 females; mean age 59.2 years; 7033 in 1996, 6289 in 1997, and 5983 in 1998) attended the GHS. Of those who attended the GHS, 19 056 (98.7%) attended the OMS (1.3% refused). This rate was fairly constant over the three years. Excluding repeat examinations, new cases recruited for OMS over the three years were 8723. Of those participating in OMS, 4269 (60.7%) attended all three years. In the cohorts examined, screening dentists recorded oral mucosal lesions in 5.4% in 1996, in 4.0% in 1997, and in 2.6% in 1998. Overall, this amounted to a positive detection rate of 4.1%, or 4.9% excluding repeat examinations. A higher prevalence of oral pre-cancer was recorded among male smokers.The overall results suggest that although compliance with attending a free GHS was low (26.2%) among Japanese subjects over 40 years of age, of those who complied 74-76% reattended annually. Hence a satisfactory participation rate can be obtained in Japan for OMS when this is coupled to a GHS conducted at the same visit.Reproducibility and validity of oral visual inspection by trained health workers in the detection of oral precancer and cancer.A randomized intervention trial is in progress in Kerala, India, to evaluate the effectiveness of oral visual inspection by trained health workers (HWs) in the prevention of oral cancer. Fourteen health workers with college graduation as the basic qualification were trained in oral visual inspection to identify oral cancers and precancers among the participants of the screening trial and to refer them for further confirmation and management. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the reproducibility and validity of the screening test provided by the health worker against the reference oral visual findings of three physicians. A total of 2069 subjects who had already been examined were re-examined by the health workers and physicians. The sensitivity and the specificity of the oral visual inspection were 94.3% and 99.3% respectively. There was moderate agreement between the findings of the initial and the repeat mouth examinations carried out by the health workers, which were on average 6 months apart. There was almost perfect agreement (kappa = 0.85) between the findings of the health workers and the physicians in identifying the different types of oral precancerous lesions. The findings of our study indicate that it is possible to train resource persons to perform the oral cancer screening test as accurately as doctors, although experience appears to be a crucial component of health workers' accuracy. The efficacy of such an approach to reduce the incidence of and mortality from oral cancer, however, remains to be proven.Early findings from a community-based, cluster-randomized, controlled oral cancer screening trial in Kerala, India. The Trivandrum Oral Cancer Screening Study Group.Oral cancer satisfies the criteria for a suitable disease for screening, and oral visual inspection is a suitable test for oral cancer screening. The efficacy of screening in reducing mortality from oral cancer has not yet been evaluated. The authors describe a cluster-randomized, controlled oral cancer screening trial in southern India and its early results.Apparently healthy subjects age 35 years or older in 13 clusters called panchayaths were randomized to either an intervention group (n = 7) or a control group (n = 6). Subjects in the intervention group will receive 3 rounds of screening consisting of oral visual inspection by trained health workers at 3-year intervals. The first round of screening was carried out between October 1995 and May 1998. Participants were visited in their homes and interviewed for sociodemographic details, tobacco-smoking and alcohol-drinking habits, and personal medical history. Those with tobacco or alcohol habits were advised to stop those habits. Subjects in the intervention group were offered screening, and those with lesions suggestive of oral leukoplakia, submucous fibrosis, or oral cancer were referred for examination by physicians. Confirmed leukoplakias were excised whenever possible, others were kept on follow-up, and those with confirmed oral cancers were referred for treatment. Data on oral cancer incidence, stage distribution, survival, and mortality in the study groups are obtained by record linkage with the Trivandrum population-based cancer registry and municipal death registration systems.There were 59,894 eligible subjects in the intervention group and 54,707 in the control group; 31.4% of the former group reported no tobacco or alcohol habits, compared with 44.1% of the latter. The distribution of age, education, occupation, income, and socioeconomic status were similar in the two groups. Of 3585 subjects in the intervention group referred, 52.4% were examined by physicians; 36 subjects with oral cancers and 1310 with oral precancers were diagnosed. Of the 63 oral cancers recorded in the cancer registry, 47 were in the intervention group and 16 were in the control group, yielding incidence rates of 56.1 and 20.3 per 100,000 person-years in the intervention and control groups, respectively. The program sensitivity for detection of oral cancer was 76.6% and the specificity 76.2%; the positive predictive value was 1.0% for oral cancer. In the intervention group, 72.3% of the cases were in Stages I-II, as opposed to 12.5% in the control group. The 3-year case fatality rates were 14.9% (7 of 47 patients) in the intervention group and 56.3% (9 of 16 patients) in the control group.Though compliance with referral for confirmatory examination in the first round was lower than the 70% anticipated, intermediate end points, such as stage at diagnosis and case fatality, indicate that the trial is making fairly satisfactory progress.The application of acetic acid in the detection of oral squamous cell carcinoma.Oral cancer is the fourth most common cancer in males and the seventh most common cancer in females in Thailand. The survival rates and quality of life of oral cancer patients will significantly be improved if they receive treatment for lesions that are less advanced or premalignant. Early diagnosis is therefore of paramount importance. A number of techniques have been developed to supplement clinical examination for oral malignancy. One interesting screening method is the application of 3% to 5% acetic acid, which has been used for cervical cancer screening.The primary objective of this study was to assess the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using vinegar (5% acetic acid) for the examination of oral cancer. The secondary objective was to investigate the association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of the tumor marker, p53.The study included 30 participants suspected of having oral squamous cell carcinoma. Five percent acetic acid was applied to the lesions, followed by incisional biopsy. The specimens were microscopically examined for pathological diagnosis and p53 immunohistochemical investigation.The sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of using acetic acid for oral cancer examination were 83.33%, 84.21%, and 83.64%, respectively. There was a statistically significant association between clinical examination using acetic acid and expression of p53 protein (P = .000).The results of this study suggest that 5% acetic acid has high sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy in detecting oral squamous cell carcinoma and might be used as an adjunct for oral cancer examination.Toluidine blue staining test for early detection of oral cancer: an adjunct to biopsy.Acetic acid wash and chemiluminescent illumination as an adjunct to conventional oral soft tissue examination for the detection of dysplasia: a pilot study.Population-based oral cancer screening appears to be a promising health promotion strategy (especially in high-risk individuals) with significant increases in quality-adjusted life years saved. However, the current protocol, conventional visual inspection, and palpation of oral soft tissues for the early detection of pre-malignant or malignant changes, appears to be deficient. The adjunctive application of technology to highlight such lesions may increase the diagnostic yield. The purpose of this pilot study was to collect data, which might support the hypothesis that oral soft tissues exhibit features similar to the cervical epithelium following an acetic acid wash and visual inspection under chemiluminescent illumination. The data provides strong evidence to support the hypothesis. Epithelium with hyperkeratinization, hyperparakeratinization, and/or chronic inflammatory infiltrate reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light more strongly and appears amplified. Similarly, epithelium with an altered nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio also reflects the diffuse, low-level, blue-white chemiluminescent light. In such cases, the lesions become clinically discernible and appear "acetowhite." Large-scale studies are required to further refine issues related to the selectivity and specificity of the technology.A comparison of two cytologic methods for mass screening against oral cancer.Use of methylene blue as a diagnostic aid in early detection of oral cancer and precancerous lesions.We assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive value of methylene blue staining in the diagnosis of oral cancer in 58 patients. The sensitivity was 90%, the specificity 69%, positive predictive value 74%, and negative predictive value 87%. Because of the number of false negatives and false positives we recommend that the diagnosis should always be confirmed by histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen. Methylene blue staining may, however, be useful as a screening tool for oral cancer in large, high-risk groups in a similar way to the more expensive toluidine blue.Reliability of oral precancer screening by primary health care workers in Sri Lanka.The accuracy of the field diagnosis is of crucial importance in the successful implementation of a screening programme. In Sri Lanka, the feasibility of using primary health care workers for oral cancer and precancer screening was pilot tested between 1980 and 1982. This paper analyses in detail the categories of false positives referred and the false negatives detected following screening. Among 660 subjects who arrived at the referral centre following screening, 64 (10 per cent) had no apparent oral lesion. The predictive value determined in this study was 58 per cent for a referrable lesion and 98 per cent for non referrable cases.Utilization of primary health care workers for early detection of oral cancer and precancer cases in Sri Lanka.Oral cancer presents a serious public health problem in south-east Asian countries. In Sri Lanka and India 35-40% of all cancers are reported to be oral cancers, which are curable if detected in the early stages. The idea that, in developing countries, one of the few practical approaches to early detection of these cases could be through the utilization of primary health care workers was tested in a field study carried out in Sri Lanka. In a control area the subjects with oral lesions were identified by medical/dental officers. In the study, 34 primary health care workers were able, alongside their routine duties, to examine the oral cavity of 28 295 subjects during a period of 52 weeks; 1220 subjects were detected with lesions needing re-examination. The performance of these primary health care workers was very satisfactory in terms of the number of cases detected and the accuracy of their diagnoses, which were verified by re-examination at a specially designated referral centre. The clinical diagnoses of the three categories of lesions detected were as follows: stage 1 lesions for observation (homogeneous or ulcerated leukoplakia), stage 2 lesions for investigation (speckled leukoplakia, erythroplakia, or submucous fibrosis), and stage 3 lesions for treatment (cancer). There was 89% correspondence between the stage 1-3 diagnoses by the health workers and the clinical diagnoses made at the referral centre. However, compliance by patients was low because only 50% of the cases detected in the field attended the referral centre. The cost-effectiveness of this approach to cancer control has been demonstrated.Efficacy of the ViziLite system in the identification of oral lesions.Early detection of oral cancer is crucial in improving survival rate. To improve early detection, the use of a dilute acetic acid rinse and observation under a chemiluminescent light (ViziLite; Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, AZ) has been recommended. However, to date, the contributions of the individual components of the system have not been studied. The present study was done to investigate the efficacy of the individual components of the ViziLite system in providing improved visualization of early oral mucosal lesions.A total of 100 patients, 39 males and 61 females, age 18 to 93 years (mean age, 44 years), who presented to the Virginia Commonwealth University School of Dentistry for dental screening were examined. There were 58 Caucasians, 29 African-Americans, 5 Hispanics, 6 Asians, and 2 of mixed ethnicity. Thirty-five patients smoked, 53 used alcohol, and 25 both smoked and drank. After written consent, the oral cavity was examined under incandescent light for soft tissue abnormalities. After 1-minute rinse with 1% acetic acid, the mouth was re-examined for additional mucosal abnormalities. Then, the mouth was examined once again using the ViziLite system's chemiluminescent light. Any lesions detected by these 3 examinations that were clinically undiagnosable were brush biopsied (Oral CDx) for determination of cellular representation.In the original examination of the 100 patients, 57 clinically diagnosable benign lesions (eg, linea alba, leukoedema) and 29 clinically undiagnosable lesions were detected. After the rinse, 6 additional diagnosable lesions (linea alba) and 3 undiagnosable lesions were found. No additional lesions were detected with the chemiluminescent light. Of the 32 undiagnosable lesions that were brush biopsied, 2 were positive for atypical cellular characterization and warranted further investigation with a scalpel biopsy. Neither of these lesions was found to be premalignant or malignant.Although the acid rinse accentuated some lesions, the overall detection rate was not significantly improved. The chemiluminescent light produced reflections that made visualization more difficult and thus was not beneficial.Annual screening for oral cancer detection.Most oral cancer and oral mucosal screening programs initiated in the past 20 years have been limited to a single examination of the population under study. Age specific, annual oral mucosal screening examination as a part of general health screening has been in operation in Tokonama city, Japan, from 1986. From 1996 the same target population aged 40 years and older has been invited for screening. The program coverage extended to 26% of the city population. During 1995-1998, out of 9536 attendees who participated in a general health and oral mucosal screening program in Tokoname city 6340 subjects (66.5%) re-attended at least for one further screening examination. There was no difference in the attendance for two annual mucosal examinations between male (67.0%) and female (66.2%) subjects. Three thousand nine hundred thirty-five subjects attended oral screening all 3 years (1996-1999) and the overall show-up rate for three consecutive examinations was 61%. During September-October 1996, 42 volunteer dentists carried out 6705 mouth examinations among those aged 40 years and older at the Municipal Center. One oral cancer was detected in 1996, in a subject free of any mucosal disease in the previous year. Among the screen-negative cases in 1996, 78% re-attended for screening in 1997 and 79% re-attended in the subsequent year. In the cohort that re-attended screening (1996-1998), oral mucosal pathology detected in three consecutive screenings included 18 leukoplakias, 24 with oral lichen planus and 343 other benign mucosal lesions. The number of subjects who complied to return and who remained disease-free over the 3-year period amounted to 3860, 59% of the disease-free subjects seen in 1996. A regular smoker was less likely to attend oral cancer screening in the three consecutive years of follow-up (odds ratio: 0.832, 95% CI 0.701-0.988). Satisfactory participation can be obtained for annual oral mucosal screening in Japan: this allows detection of new lesions, including oral cancer and leukoplakia (a surrogate marker of cancer risk). The number of new oral cancers detected in the program was too low to determine the optimal frequency for oral cancer screening but new oral leukoplakias were found on annual re-screening: the data indicate that the interval between two screens for this population should not be greater than 12 months.Opportunistic screening for oral cancer and precancer in general dental practice: results of a demonstration study.To demonstrate the feasibility of opportunistic oral cancer and precancer screening in general dental practice and to determine the prevalence of relevant lesions and risk habits in a population of general dental practice attenders.A prospective demonstration study, recruiting patients opportunistically.General dental practices.Eighteen general dental practitioners took part in this study. Each attended training sessions to be advised of the study protocol and the criteria of a positive and negative screen. Patients over the age of 35 years were prospectively and opportunistically recruited. Each patient was asked to complete a health questionnaire concerning age, gender, ethnicity, smoking and drinking habits. The dentist then examined the soft tissues and recorded the presence or absence of lesions independently on a second form. The forms were collated and data were analysed to determine prevalence of lesions and associations with risk habits.Data on 2,265 patients were available for analysis. Oral lesions were detected in 319 patients (14.1%). Ninety-four patients (4.2%) had lesions considered to be either malignant or potentially malignant. There was a significant association between positive lesions and male gender(IRR 1.86, 95% CI 1.22-2.82), heavy smoking (males: IRR 3.68, 95% Cl2.10-6.43: female; IRR 3.58, 954b CI 1.35-9.50) and heavy alcohol use in males (IRR 2.98, 95%q CI 1.06-3.47).The results suggest that patients attending general dental practices are representative of the general population both in terms of lesion prevalence and high risk habits such as smoking and drinking. This supports the view that opportunistic screening in a general dental practice setting may be a realistic alternative to population screening. Further research is needed to determine the cost effectiveness of this approach and to investigate the value of targeting high risk groups within this population. General dental practice is ideal for the evaluation of such systems prior to extending these studies to other healthcare settings.Evaluation of screening for oral cancer and precancer in a company headquarters.Oral cancer and precancer appear to fulfil many of the criteria for a disease suitable for mass screening. Several commercial organisations in the UK have introduced screening for their employees. One program has been formally evaluated over the course of 1 yr. Of 553 company headquarters staff aged > or = 40 yr, 292 (53%) responded to the well-publicised screening invitation and received a simple clinical examination of the oral mucosa from one of two company dentists. In addition, 17 staff were screened from a separate company work-site. After screening, subjects were examined independently by an oral medicine specialist with access to the relevant diagnostic aids. The dentists' screening decisions were validated against the specialist's definitive diagnoses (the 'gold standard'). The true prevalence of subjects with lesions diagnosed as positive (white patch, red patch or ulcer of greater than 2 weeks' duration) was 17 (5.5%). Overall, sensitivity was 0.71 and specificity, 0.99. The compliance rate to screening among headquarters subjects in seven occupational categories did not differ significantly from the occupational profile for all headquarters personnel. Estimates of relative risk of a positive diagnosis were calculated by logistic regression for five independent variables; gender, age, moderate smoking, heavy smoking, and smoking combined with greater than low risk alcohol consumption. Only heavy smoking (> or = 20 cigarettes per day) produced a significant odds ratio (3.43, P < 0.05).