Preliminary clinical trial of fusidic acid in psoriasis.A systematic review of antistreptococcal interventions for guttate and chronic plaque psoriasis.Guttate psoriasis is closely associated with preceding or concurrent streptococcal infection. Some authorities have claimed that chronic plaque psoriasis may also be made worse by infection. In view of this many dermatologists have recommended using antibiotics for psoriasis, particularly guttate type. Some dermatologists have also recommended tonsillectomy for psoriasis in patients with recurrent streptococcal pharyngitis.This review aims to assess the evidence for the effectiveness of antistreptococcal interventions, including antibiotics and tonsillectomy in the management of acute guttate and chronic plaque psoriasis.Studies were identified by searching the Cochrane Clinical Trials Register (Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 1999), Medline (1966-September 1999), Embase (1988-September 1999), the Salford Database of Psoriasis Trials (to November 1999) and the European Dermato-Epidemiology Network (EDEN) Psoriasis Trials Database (to November 1999) for terms (STREPTOCOCC* or ANTIBIOTIC* or TONSIL*) and PSORIASIS using the Cochrane Skin Group search strategy.Only one trial met the selection criteria. This compared the use of two oral antibiotic schedules in 20 psoriasis patients, predominantly of guttate type, who had evidence of beta-haemolytic streptococcal colonization. Either rifampicin or placebo was added to the end of a standard course of phenoxymethylpenicillin or erythromycin. No patient in either arm of the study improved during the observation period. No randomized trials of tonsillectomy for psoriasis were identified.Although both antibiotics and tonsillectomy have frequently been advocated both for patients with guttate psoriasis and for selected patients with chronic plaque psoriasis, there is to date no good evidence that either intervention is beneficial.Failure of topical polymyxin B to improve mild plaque psoriasis.Antistreptococcal treatment of guttate psoriasis: a controlled study.The role of streptococcal infection in the initiation of guttate psoriasis is well-recognized. But the treatment results with oral erythromycin and phenoxymethylpenicillin are conflicting.Our purpose was to evaluate the effectiveness of these antibiotics in the treatment of streptococcus associated guttate psoriasis comparing with a control group.A total of 43 male patients with serologic evidence of a recent streptococcal infection were studied. Their mean age was 21 years (ranged between 19 and 23 years). These 43 patients were randomly allocated into three groups (no treatment group n = 15, erythromycin group n = 14, phenoxymethylpenicillin group n = 14). Both the treatment groups were treated for 14 d. All the groups were followed up for additional 4 weeks.There were no statistically significant improvement in any group and among the groups.There was no statistically significant improvement in streptococcus associated guttate psoriasis with or without a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin.Management of guttate and generalized psoriasis vulgaris: prospective randomized study.To assess the efficacy of betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream plus ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation with and without additional penicillin therapy in the treatment of guttate psoriasis, and to compare the efficacies of oral psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy and systemic retinoids therapy for treatment of generalized psoriasis.Sixty patients with guttate (n = 20) and generalized psoriasis vulgaris (n = 40) of various intensity and duration treated at the Department of Dermatology, Medical School in Skopje, from February 2000 to January 2002, were included in this prospective, open-label, randomized, parallel group study. The clinical features of the patients were quantified according to the mean psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) values. Student s t-test for paired samples and two independent samples were used in statistical analysis.The final PASI values were not significantly different for the patients receiving different treatments of guttate psoriasis or generalized psoriasis. The initial PASI values for guttate psoriasis patients treated with betamethasone dipropionate plus UVB with and without penicillin treatment (5.7 +/- 2.1 and 5.9 +/- 2.5, respectively) declined to 0.5 +/- 0.8 and 1.0 +/- 0.9, respectively, after the therapy. The initial PASI values in generalized psoriasis patients receiving PUVA dropped from 24.1 +/- 3.6 to 1.7 +/- 1.5 by the end of the therapy. Finally, pre-treatment PASI values in patients with generalized psoriasis receiving retinoids decreased from 24.6 +/- 3.5 to 0.9 +/- 1.1 after treatment. However, patients receiving systemic retinoids for generalized psoriasis had statistically higher incidence of side effects than patients receiving PUVA therapy (t = 6.458, df = 38, p < 0.001).Penicillin should be applied in addition to local corticosteroids with UVB in the treatment of guttate psoriasis, since the disease may be triggered by a streptococcal infection. In cases of generalized psoriasis vulgaris, PUVA therapy caused fewer side effects than did systemic retinoids.Fucidic acid and psoriasis.Patient-reported Outcomes and Clinical Response in Patients with Moderate-to-severe Plaque Psoriasis Treated with Tonsillectomy: A Randomized Controlled Trial.Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with profound effects on patients' health-related quality of life (HRQoL). Twenty-nine patients with plaque psoriasis and a history of streptococcal-associated psoriasis exacerbations were randomly assigned to tonsillectomy (n = 15) or control (n = 14) groups and followed for 24 months. Patients were evaluated with the Psoriasis Disability Index, Psoriasis Life Stress Inventory and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index. HRQoL and psoriasis-related stress improved significantly in the tonsillectomy group compared with the control group (p = 0.037 and p = 0.002, respectively), with a mean 50% improvement in HRQoL and a mean 59% improvement in psoriasis-induced stress. Clinical improvement correlated significantly with improved HRQoL (r = 0.297, p = 0.008) and psoriasis-related stress (r = 0.310, p = 0.005). Of the tonsillectomized patients, 87% concluded that the procedure was worthwhile. Tonsillectomy may improve quality of life for selected patients with plaque psoriasis.Fucidin in psoriasis. A double-blind study of twenty psoriatics over two periods of four weeks each.A therapeutic trial of the use of penicillin V or erythromycin with or without rifampin in the treatment of psoriasis.After the publication of an uncontrolled trial of nine patients with streptococcus-associated psoriasis who appeared to benefit from a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days, we wished to confirm or refute the validity of this observation.Our purpose was to confirm the effectiveness of antibiotics in the treatment of streptococcus-associated psoriasis.Twenty patients were placed randomly into two groups. One group was given penicillin or erythromycin for 14 days with a placebo added during the last 5 of the 14 days. The other group received the same medication with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days.Although all the patients studied met the criteria of the reported preliminary study, we were unable to detect any evidence of improvement in their psoriasis.There was no apparent benefit for patients with streptococcus-associated psoriasis from a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days in a 14-day trial.Old drug--new indication. Rifampicin in psoriasis.The efficacy of traditional systemic therapies for psoriasis is limited by various side effects, toxicity, drug-drug interactions, and the need for frequent laboratory monitoring. In animal models, rifampicin causes immunosuppression and in conventional doses it suppresses the T-cell function.To show that rifampicin has a therapeutic effect in eruptive psoriasis and to try to explain its mode of action.A total of 76 patients (34 men and 42 women, aged between 12 and 68 years) with eruptive psoriasis were enrolled in the study. They were divided into two groups according to the evidence of a concomitant streptococcal infection. Rifampicin was administered orally in a 600 mg daily dosage for at least 60 days. Only emollients were given for topical therapy.A statistical (chi-squared test) analysis was done and it could be concluded that improvement in the two groups was statistically indistinguishable (p = 0.892), while comparison with the control group showed a significant difference (p = 0.00082).The results express that there is no statistically significant difference between the treating groups and the effect of rifampicin could not be related only to its antimicrobial properties. Its therapeutic effect most probably is due to its immunosuppressive properties.An open trial of oral macrolide treatment for psoriasis vulgaris.Seventeen patients were included in a clinical open trial of macrolides for treatment of psoriasis vulgaris. PASI scores, itch and ointment scores were used to evaluate their effectiveness. PASI scores dropped from 22.8 to 13.7; this was statistically significant. Itch reduced in 11 out of 13 patients, and the extent of itch reduced significantly by 54% on average. Ointment scores reduced from 44.9 to 34.4, which was also statistically significant. Macrolides are known not only as potent anti-biotics, but also as immunomodulatory agents. These data suggest that macrolides could be used as one of the adjunctive therapies of psoriasis vulgaris, and this study is a first step toward the future evaluation of macrolides in a double blind trial.Streptococcal throat infections and exacerbation of chronic plaque psoriasis: a prospective study.Guttate psoriasis has a well-known association with streptococcal throat infections but the effects of these infections in patients with chronic psoriasis remains to be evaluated in a prospective study.To determine whether streptococcal throat infections are more common in and can cause exacerbation in patients with chronic psoriasis.Two hundred and eight patients with chronic plaque psoriasis and 116 unrelated age-matched household controls were followed for 1 year. At recruitment all patients were examined, their disease severity scored and throat swabs taken. Patients and corresponding controls were then re-examined and tested for streptococcal colonization whenever they reported sore throat or exacerbation of their psoriasis during the study period.The psoriasis patients reported sore throat significantly more often than controls (61 of 208 vs. three of 116, P < 0.0001), and beta-haemolytic streptococci of Lancefield groups A, C and G (M protein-positive streptococci) were more often cultured from the patients than the controls (19 of 208 vs. one of 116, P = 0.003). A significant exacerbation of psoriasis (P = 0.004) was observed only if streptococci were isolated and the patients were assessed 4 days or later after the onset of sore throat. No difference was observed between groups A, C or G streptococci in this respect.This study confirms anecdotal and retrospective reports that streptococcal throat infections can cause exacerbation of chronic plaque psoriasis. It is concluded that psoriasis patients should be encouraged to report sore throat to their physician and that early treatment of streptococcal throat infections might be beneficial in psoriasis. A controlled trial for assessing potential benefits of tonsillectomy in patients with severe psoriasis should also be considered.Long-term oral azithromycin in chronic plaque psoriasis: a controlled trial.Continued sub-clinical streptococcal infection might be responsible for chronic plaque psoriasis. Considering the beneficial effect of benzathine penicillin in chronic plaque psoriasis, but due to the risk of penicillin sensitivity and to its painful parenteral route of administration, we tried oral azithromycin in this single blind randomized case-control trial. 50 patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis were enrolled. Of these, 30 randomly selected patients received azithromycin for 48 weeks as a single oral 500 mg daily dose for 4 days with a gap of 10 days (total 24 such courses). The remaining 20 patients received a vitamin C tablet (non-chewable) in the same dosage schedule. Informed consent was obtained from all patients enrolled. Though the trial concluded at 48 weeks, patients in the azithromycin-arm were followed for another year to observe any relapse. A significant improvement in PASI score was noted from 12 weeks in the majority of patients in the azithromycin group. At the end of 48 weeks, 18 patients (60%) showed excellent improvement, while 6 patients (20%) showed good improvement and 4 patients (13.33%) showed mild improvement. PASI 75 was 80%. No significant change was seen in lesions in the control group. 2 patients in the study group and 5 patients in the control group did not complete the prescribed duration of study. An exacerbation in lesions was reported in 5 cases (16.66%) in the group receiving azithromycin. These exacerbations also responded by continuing the same treatment. At the end of another one year follow up in the azithromycin-arm, 6 patients (20%) developed a recurrence of lesions. Relevant investigations and clinical assessments were done at regular intervals to observe any side-effects and to check progress of the disease. Data were analysed statistically by using the student t-test. Patients tolerated the therapy well.Improvement of psoriasis after tonsillectomy is associated with a decrease in the frequency of circulating T cells that recognize streptococcal determinants and homologous skin determinants.Exacerbation of chronic psoriasis can be associated with streptococcal throat infections, and T cells that respond to peptide sequences common to streptococcal M proteins and skin keratins have been detected in patients' blood. To our knowledge, we have conducted the first blinded, prospective study to assess the impact of tonsillectomy on psoriasis. Twenty-nine patients with chronic psoriasis and history of exacerbation after sore throat were randomly assigned to tonsillectomy (n = 15) or control (n = 14) groups and monitored for 2 y clinically and by enumeration of circulating skin homing T cells that respond to short homologous M protein or keratin peptides. Thirteen patients (86%) showed sustained improvement after tonsillectomy ranging from 30 to 90% reduction in disease severity. Furthermore, there was a close correlation between the degree of clinical improvement in individual patients and reduction in the frequency of peptide-reactive skin-homing T cells in their circulation. No corresponding clinical or immunologic changes were observed among the controls. These findings indicate that tonsillectomy may have a beneficial effect on chronic psoriasis because the palatine tonsils generate effector T cells that recognize keratin determinants in the skin.Use of rifampin with penicillin and erythromycin in the treatment of psoriasis. Preliminary report.The addition of 5 days of rifampin therapy to a 10- or 14-day course of penicillin or erythromycin therapy has been shown to reduce greatly the rate of chronic streptococcal carriage. The empiric use of rifampin in combination with penicillin or erythromycin in nine of nine patients with streptococcal-associated psoriasis appeared to coincide with a marked improvement in their skin.Old drug--new indication. Rifampicin in psoriasis.The efficacy of traditional systemic therapies for psoriasis is limited by various side effects, toxicity, drug-drug interactions, and the need for frequent laboratory monitoring. In animal models, rifampicin causes immunosuppression and in conventional doses it suppresses the T-cell function.To show that rifampicin has a therapeutic effect in eruptive psoriasis and to try to explain its mode of action.A total of 76 patients (34 men and 42 women, aged between 12 and 68 years) with eruptive psoriasis were enrolled in the study. They were divided into two groups according to the evidence of a concomitant streptococcal infection. Rifampicin was administered orally in a 600 mg daily dosage for at least 60 days. Only emollients were given for topical therapy.A statistical (chi-squared test) analysis was done and it could be concluded that improvement in the two groups was statistically indistinguishable (p = 0.892), while comparison with the control group showed a significant difference (p = 0.00082).The results express that there is no statistically significant difference between the treating groups and the effect of rifampicin could not be related only to its antimicrobial properties. Its therapeutic effect most probably is due to its immunosuppressive properties.An open trial of oral macrolide treatment for psoriasis vulgaris.Seventeen patients were included in a clinical open trial of macrolides for treatment of psoriasis vulgaris. PASI scores, itch and ointment scores were used to evaluate their effectiveness. PASI scores dropped from 22.8 to 13.7; this was statistically significant. Itch reduced in 11 out of 13 patients, and the extent of itch reduced significantly by 54% on average. Ointment scores reduced from 44.9 to 34.4, which was also statistically significant. Macrolides are known not only as potent anti-biotics, but also as immunomodulatory agents. These data suggest that macrolides could be used as one of the adjunctive therapies of psoriasis vulgaris, and this study is a first step toward the future evaluation of macrolides in a double blind trial.A therapeutic trial of the use of penicillin V or erythromycin with or without rifampin in the treatment of psoriasis.After the publication of an uncontrolled trial of nine patients with streptococcus-associated psoriasis who appeared to benefit from a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days, we wished to confirm or refute the validity of this observation.Our purpose was to confirm the effectiveness of antibiotics in the treatment of streptococcus-associated psoriasis.Twenty patients were placed randomly into two groups. One group was given penicillin or erythromycin for 14 days with a placebo added during the last 5 of the 14 days. The other group received the same medication with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days.Although all the patients studied met the criteria of the reported preliminary study, we were unable to detect any evidence of improvement in their psoriasis.There was no apparent benefit for patients with streptococcus-associated psoriasis from a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin with the addition of rifampin in the last 5 days in a 14-day trial.Failure of topical polymyxin B to improve mild plaque psoriasis.Streptococcal throat infections and exacerbation of chronic plaque psoriasis: a prospective study.Guttate psoriasis has a well-known association with streptococcal throat infections but the effects of these infections in patients with chronic psoriasis remains to be evaluated in a prospective study.To determine whether streptococcal throat infections are more common in and can cause exacerbation in patients with chronic psoriasis.Two hundred and eight patients with chronic plaque psoriasis and 116 unrelated age-matched household controls were followed for 1 year. At recruitment all patients were examined, their disease severity scored and throat swabs taken. Patients and corresponding controls were then re-examined and tested for streptococcal colonization whenever they reported sore throat or exacerbation of their psoriasis during the study period.The psoriasis patients reported sore throat significantly more often than controls (61 of 208 vs. three of 116, P < 0.0001), and beta-haemolytic streptococci of Lancefield groups A, C and G (M protein-positive streptococci) were more often cultured from the patients than the controls (19 of 208 vs. one of 116, P = 0.003). A significant exacerbation of psoriasis (P = 0.004) was observed only if streptococci were isolated and the patients were assessed 4 days or later after the onset of sore throat. No difference was observed between groups A, C or G streptococci in this respect.This study confirms anecdotal and retrospective reports that streptococcal throat infections can cause exacerbation of chronic plaque psoriasis. It is concluded that psoriasis patients should be encouraged to report sore throat to their physician and that early treatment of streptococcal throat infections might be beneficial in psoriasis. A controlled trial for assessing potential benefits of tonsillectomy in patients with severe psoriasis should also be considered.Fucidic acid and psoriasis.Preliminary clinical trial of fusidic acid in psoriasis.A systematic review of antistreptococcal interventions for guttate and chronic plaque psoriasis.Guttate psoriasis is closely associated with preceding or concurrent streptococcal infection. Some authorities have claimed that chronic plaque psoriasis may also be made worse by infection. In view of this many dermatologists have recommended using antibiotics for psoriasis, particularly guttate type. Some dermatologists have also recommended tonsillectomy for psoriasis in patients with recurrent streptococcal pharyngitis.This review aims to assess the evidence for the effectiveness of antistreptococcal interventions, including antibiotics and tonsillectomy in the management of acute guttate and chronic plaque psoriasis.Studies were identified by searching the Cochrane Clinical Trials Register (Cochrane Library, Issue 3, 1999), Medline (1966-September 1999), Embase (1988-September 1999), the Salford Database of Psoriasis Trials (to November 1999) and the European Dermato-Epidemiology Network (EDEN) Psoriasis Trials Database (to November 1999) for terms (STREPTOCOCC* or ANTIBIOTIC* or TONSIL*) and PSORIASIS using the Cochrane Skin Group search strategy.Only one trial met the selection criteria. This compared the use of two oral antibiotic schedules in 20 psoriasis patients, predominantly of guttate type, who had evidence of beta-haemolytic streptococcal colonization. Either rifampicin or placebo was added to the end of a standard course of phenoxymethylpenicillin or erythromycin. No patient in either arm of the study improved during the observation period. No randomized trials of tonsillectomy for psoriasis were identified.Although both antibiotics and tonsillectomy have frequently been advocated both for patients with guttate psoriasis and for selected patients with chronic plaque psoriasis, there is to date no good evidence that either intervention is beneficial.Patient-reported Outcomes and Clinical Response in Patients with Moderate-to-severe Plaque Psoriasis Treated with Tonsillectomy: A Randomized Controlled Trial.Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with profound effects on patients' health-related quality of life (HRQoL). Twenty-nine patients with plaque psoriasis and a history of streptococcal-associated psoriasis exacerbations were randomly assigned to tonsillectomy (n = 15) or control (n = 14) groups and followed for 24 months. Patients were evaluated with the Psoriasis Disability Index, Psoriasis Life Stress Inventory and Psoriasis Area and Severity Index. HRQoL and psoriasis-related stress improved significantly in the tonsillectomy group compared with the control group (p = 0.037 and p = 0.002, respectively), with a mean 50% improvement in HRQoL and a mean 59% improvement in psoriasis-induced stress. Clinical improvement correlated significantly with improved HRQoL (r = 0.297, p = 0.008) and psoriasis-related stress (r = 0.310, p = 0.005). Of the tonsillectomized patients, 87% concluded that the procedure was worthwhile. Tonsillectomy may improve quality of life for selected patients with plaque psoriasis.Long-term oral azithromycin in chronic plaque psoriasis: a controlled trial.Continued sub-clinical streptococcal infection might be responsible for chronic plaque psoriasis. Considering the beneficial effect of benzathine penicillin in chronic plaque psoriasis, but due to the risk of penicillin sensitivity and to its painful parenteral route of administration, we tried oral azithromycin in this single blind randomized case-control trial. 50 patients with moderate to severe chronic plaque psoriasis were enrolled. Of these, 30 randomly selected patients received azithromycin for 48 weeks as a single oral 500 mg daily dose for 4 days with a gap of 10 days (total 24 such courses). The remaining 20 patients received a vitamin C tablet (non-chewable) in the same dosage schedule. Informed consent was obtained from all patients enrolled. Though the trial concluded at 48 weeks, patients in the azithromycin-arm were followed for another year to observe any relapse. A significant improvement in PASI score was noted from 12 weeks in the majority of patients in the azithromycin group. At the end of 48 weeks, 18 patients (60%) showed excellent improvement, while 6 patients (20%) showed good improvement and 4 patients (13.33%) showed mild improvement. PASI 75 was 80%. No significant change was seen in lesions in the control group. 2 patients in the study group and 5 patients in the control group did not complete the prescribed duration of study. An exacerbation in lesions was reported in 5 cases (16.66%) in the group receiving azithromycin. These exacerbations also responded by continuing the same treatment. At the end of another one year follow up in the azithromycin-arm, 6 patients (20%) developed a recurrence of lesions. Relevant investigations and clinical assessments were done at regular intervals to observe any side-effects and to check progress of the disease. Data were analysed statistically by using the student t-test. Patients tolerated the therapy well.Antistreptococcal treatment of guttate psoriasis: a controlled study.The role of streptococcal infection in the initiation of guttate psoriasis is well-recognized. But the treatment results with oral erythromycin and phenoxymethylpenicillin are conflicting.Our purpose was to evaluate the effectiveness of these antibiotics in the treatment of streptococcus associated guttate psoriasis comparing with a control group.A total of 43 male patients with serologic evidence of a recent streptococcal infection were studied. Their mean age was 21 years (ranged between 19 and 23 years). These 43 patients were randomly allocated into three groups (no treatment group n = 15, erythromycin group n = 14, phenoxymethylpenicillin group n = 14). Both the treatment groups were treated for 14 d. All the groups were followed up for additional 4 weeks.There were no statistically significant improvement in any group and among the groups.There was no statistically significant improvement in streptococcus associated guttate psoriasis with or without a course of oral penicillin or erythromycin.Management of guttate and generalized psoriasis vulgaris: prospective randomized study.To assess the efficacy of betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream plus ultraviolet B (UVB) radiation with and without additional penicillin therapy in the treatment of guttate psoriasis, and to compare the efficacies of oral psoralen plus ultraviolet A (PUVA) therapy and systemic retinoids therapy for treatment of generalized psoriasis.Sixty patients with guttate (n = 20) and generalized psoriasis vulgaris (n = 40) of various intensity and duration treated at the Department of Dermatology, Medical School in Skopje, from February 2000 to January 2002, were included in this prospective, open-label, randomized, parallel group study. The clinical features of the patients were quantified according to the mean psoriasis area and severity index (PASI) values. Student s t-test for paired samples and two independent samples were used in statistical analysis.The final PASI values were not significantly different for the patients receiving different treatments of guttate psoriasis or generalized psoriasis. The initial PASI values for guttate psoriasis patients treated with betamethasone dipropionate plus UVB with and without penicillin treatment (5.7 +/- 2.1 and 5.9 +/- 2.5, respectively) declined to 0.5 +/- 0.8 and 1.0 +/- 0.9, respectively, after the therapy. The initial PASI values in generalized psoriasis patients receiving PUVA dropped from 24.1 +/- 3.6 to 1.7 +/- 1.5 by the end of the therapy. Finally, pre-treatment PASI values in patients with generalized psoriasis receiving retinoids decreased from 24.6 +/- 3.5 to 0.9 +/- 1.1 after treatment. However, patients receiving systemic retinoids for generalized psoriasis had statistically higher incidence of side effects than patients receiving PUVA therapy (t = 6.458, df = 38, p < 0.001).Penicillin should be applied in addition to local corticosteroids with UVB in the treatment of guttate psoriasis, since the disease may be triggered by a streptococcal infection. In cases of generalized psoriasis vulgaris, PUVA therapy caused fewer side effects than did systemic retinoids.Fucidin in psoriasis. A double-blind study of twenty psoriatics over two periods of four weeks each.Use of rifampin with penicillin and erythromycin in the treatment of psoriasis. Preliminary report.The addition of 5 days of rifampin therapy to a 10- or 14-day course of penicillin or erythromycin therapy has been shown to reduce greatly the rate of chronic streptococcal carriage. The empiric use of rifampin in combination with penicillin or erythromycin in nine of nine patients with streptococcal-associated psoriasis appeared to coincide with a marked improvement in their skin.Improvement of psoriasis after tonsillectomy is associated with a decrease in the frequency of circulating T cells that recognize streptococcal determinants and homologous skin determinants.Exacerbation of chronic psoriasis can be associated with streptococcal throat infections, and T cells that respond to peptide sequences common to streptococcal M proteins and skin keratins have been detected in patients' blood. To our knowledge, we have conducted the first blinded, prospective study to assess the impact of tonsillectomy on psoriasis. Twenty-nine patients with chronic psoriasis and history of exacerbation after sore throat were randomly assigned to tonsillectomy (n = 15) or control (n = 14) groups and monitored for 2 y clinically and by enumeration of circulating skin homing T cells that respond to short homologous M protein or keratin peptides. Thirteen patients (86%) showed sustained improvement after tonsillectomy ranging from 30 to 90% reduction in disease severity. Furthermore, there was a close correlation between the degree of clinical improvement in individual patients and reduction in the frequency of peptide-reactive skin-homing T cells in their circulation. No corresponding clinical or immunologic changes were observed among the controls. These findings indicate that tonsillectomy may have a beneficial effect on chronic psoriasis because the palatine tonsils generate effector T cells that recognize keratin determinants in the skin.