What is the criterion for differentiating chronic hepatitis from compensated cirrhosis? A prospective study comparing ultrasonography and percutaneous liver biopsy.The diagnosis of cirrhosis is currently based on percutaneous liver biopsy, although this procedure may give rise to false negative results. This prospective study blindly investigates the accuracy of an ultrasonographic score, derived from liver, spleen and portal vein features, in predicting the final diagnosis in 212 patients with compensated chronic liver disease undergoing percutaneous liver biopsy.Taking biopsy as the standard, the ultrasonographic score differed significantly between chronic hepatitis (39+/-33) and cirrhosis (100+/-35) (p<0.0001). Discriminant analysis with stepwise forward selection of the variables identified liver surface nodularity and portal flow velocity as independently associated with the diagnosis of cirrhosis (p<0.005), and a score based on these two variables correctly identified cirrhosis in 82.2% of cases. One or both of these abnormalities were also found in 27/32 patients who were diagnosed as having cirrhosis at ultrasound, but were not cirrhotic histologically. Eight of these 32 cases developed signs of decompensated liver disease and/or portal hypertension in the subsequent 6-month follow-up, thus supporting the diagnosis of cirrhosis.Our data suggest that ultrasound is accurate in predicting the final diagnosis in patients with compensated chronic liver disease and may identify cirrhosis even in the absence of a typical histopathological pattern. However, neither percutaneous liver biopsy nor ultrasonography can be assumed to be the definitive criterion for the diagnosis of compensated cirrhosis.Ultrasonographic diagnosis of hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis.Evaluation of the degree of hepatic fibrosis is especially important in patients with chronic liver disease. Our aim was to study the diagnostic accuracy of abdominal ultrasonography for cirrhosis or fibrosis.Twenty-three clinical (n=12) and Doppler ultrasonic (n=11) variables were recorded in 243 patients with chronic (alcoholic and viral) liver disease under conditions close to those of clinical practice. Fibrosis was classified into six grades by two pathologists. Diagnostic accuracy was evaluated by discriminant analysis, first globally using all variables, then by stepwise analysis.A) Diagnosis of cirrhosis: 1) whole group (n=243): diagnostic accuracy was globally 84%, and 84% with two variables: spleen length, portal velocity; 2) compensated chronic liver disease (n=191): diagnostic accuracy was globally 85%, and 82% with two variables: liver surface, liver length (right kidney); 3) alcoholic compensated chronic liver disease (n=109): diagnostic accuracy was globally 86%, and 88% with two variables: spleen length, liver length (middle clavicle); 4) viral compensated chronic liver disease (n= 83): diagnostic accuracy was globally 86% and 86% with one variable: liver surface. By subtracting the proportion of patients who could not be investigated due to anatomical limitations, the highest calculated univariate diagnostic accuracy decreased by 7%. B) Diagnosis of fibrosis: diagnostic accuracy was globally 84% for extensive fibrosis.Cirrhosis can be correctly diagnosed in 82-88% of patients with chronic liver disease using a few ultrasonographic signs. However, the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound is decreased by the anatomical limitations of this technique.Ultrasonographic scoring system score versus liver stiffness measurement in prediction of cirrhosis.We compared the cirrhosis-prediction accuracy of an ultrasonographic scoring system (USSS) combining six representative sonographic indices with that of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by transient elastography, and prospectively investigated the correlation between the USSS score and LSM in predicting cirrhosis.Two hundred and thirty patients with chronic liver diseases (187 men, 43 women; age, 50.4±9.5 y, mean±SD) were enrolled in this prospective study. The USSS produces a combined score for nodularity of the liver surface and edge, parenchyma echogenicity, presence of right-lobe atrophy, spleen size, splenic vein diameter, and abnormality of the hepatic vein waveform. The correlations of the USSS score and LSM with that of a pathological liver biopsy (METAVIR scoring system: F0-F4) were evaluated.The mean USSS score and LSM were 7.2 and 38.0 kPa, respectively, in patients with histologically overt cirrhosis (F4, P=0.017) and 4.3 and 22.1 kPa in patients with fibrotic change without overt cirrhosis (F0-F3) (P=0.025). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of the USSS score and LSM for F4 patients were 0.849 and 0.729, respectively. On the basis of ROC curves, criteria of USSS ≥6: LSM ≥17.4 had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy of 89.2%:77.6%, 69.4%:61.4%, 86.5%:83.7%, 74.6%:51.9% and 0.83:0.73, respectively, in predicting F4.The results indicate that this USSS has comparable efficacy to LSM in the diagnosis of cirrhosis.Comparison of liver histology with ultrasonography in assessing diffuse parenchymal liver disease.To establish the accuracy of ultrasonography in assessing diffuse parenchymal liver disease we performed a prospective comparative study with histology in 50 patients with a wide range of liver disease. Liver biopsy was performed within 24 h of the ultrasound examination and ultrasonography was performed by a single operator who was unaware of clinical details of the patients. Histology was reviewed blind and the degree of steatosis graded mild, moderate or severe while increased portal fibrous tissue was graded mild, moderate or established cirrhosis. Thirty-six patients had steatosis and 31 patients had increased fibrous tissue on histology. Ultrasonography correctly identified steatosis in 32/36 (89%) patients including all patients with the severe grade. Increased fibrous tissue was correctly identified in 24/31 (77%) with a sensitivity of 100% in patients with moderate fibrosis and established cirrhosis. Specificity was 93% for steatosis and 89% for increased fibrous tissue. These results show that ultrasonography can provide a non-invasive prediction of liver histology which in moderate and severe steatosis and advanced fibrosis can be both highly sensitive and specific.Ultrasound scanning in the detection of hepatic fibrosis and steatosis.Hepatic steatosis and fibrosis produce abnormal echo patterns on ultrasound scanning, but the potential of ultrasound scanning for diagnosing these conditions in routine clinical practice is uncertain. A prospective comparative study of 85 patients with histologically assessed liver conditions was performed, and specificity was assessed in 76 patients with functional bowel disease who were presumed to have normal livers. Histological examination showed steatosis ranging from mild to severe in 48 patients and fibrosis ranging from increased fibrous tissue to established cirrhosis in 35 patients. Ultrasound scanning accurately identified steatosis, recognising 45 cases (sensitivity 94%) with a specificity of 84%. Fibrosis was less reliably detected (sensitivity 57% and specificity 88%). Of the 50 patients with alcoholic liver disease, 47 (94%) yielded abnormal results on scanning. In the 76 patients with functional bowel disease there was only one false positive result, giving a specificity of 99% in this group. As hepatic steatosis is the earliest change in alcoholic liver disease and seems to be of prognostic importance for the development of cirrhosis, ultrasound scanning provides an effective screening procedure, particularly in the occult alcoholic, who often presents with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints.Hepatic vein arrival time as assessed by contrast-enhanced ultrasonography is useful for the assessment of portal hypertension in compensated cirrhosis.The measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) for the estimation of portal hypertension (PH) in cirrhosis has some limitations, including its invasiveness. Hepatic vein arrival time (HVAT), as assessed by microbubble contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS), is negatively correlated with the histological grade of liver fibrosis because of the associated hemodynamic abnormalities. Anatomical and pathophysiological changes in liver microcirculation are the initial events leading to PH. However, the direct relationship between HVAT and PH has not been evaluated. The present study measured both HVPG and HVAT in 71 consecutive patients with compensated cirrhosis and analyzed the relationship between the two parameters (i.e., the derivation set). Results were validated in 35 compensated patients with cirrhosis at another medical center (i.e., the validation set). The derivation set had HVPG and HVAT values of 11.4 ± 5.0 mmHg (mean ± standard deviation; range, 2-23) and 14.1 ± 3.4 seconds (range, 8.4-24.2), respectively; there was a statistically significant negative correlation between HVPG and HVAT (r(2) = 0.545; P < 0.001). The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) was 0.973 for clinically significant PH (CSPH; HVPG, ≥ 10 mmHg), and the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and positive and negative likelihood ratios for CSPH for an HVAT cut-off value of 14 seconds were 92.7%, 86.7%, 90.5%, 89.7%, 6.95, and 0.08, respectively. In addition, a shorter HVAT was associated with worse Child-Pugh score (P < 0.001) and esophageal varices (P = 0.018). In the validation set, there was also a significant negative correlation between HVAT and HVPG (r(2) = 0.538; P < 0.001), and AUROC = 0.953 for CSPH. HVAT was significantly correlated with PH. These results indicate that measuring HVAT is useful for the noninvasive prediction of CSPH in patients with compensated cirrhosis.Severe liver fibrosis or cirrhosis: accuracy of US for detection--analysis of 300 cases.To determine the accuracy of various ultrasonographic (US) signs for assessment of the degree of liver fibrosis, with histologic results as reference standard.Three hundred consecutive asymptomatic patients with at least 6 months of increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase and/or alanine aminotransferase underwent liver US and biopsy. The estimated pretest probability of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis was 35%. Three US parameters were investigated: liver surface nodularity, caudate lobe hypertrophy, and pattern of hepatic venous blood flow. US results were compared with histologic results obtained after liver biopsy, which constituted the reference standard for diagnosis of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis. The degree of fibrosis was graded according to METAVIR criteria, with stages 3 and 4 considered together. Data were analyzed with kappa and chi2 statistics. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios, and posttest probability were calculated for each US sign.In 107 (36%) patients with severe fibrosis (n = 34) or cirrhosis (n = 73), liver surface nodularity had the highest diagnostic accuracy, with specificity of 95% and positive and negative likelihood ratios 11.6 and 0.51, respectively. When liver surface nodularity was considered alone, posttest probability of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis increased from 35% to 86%. When caudate lobe hypertrophy and hepatic venous blood flow were also taken into account, posttest probability increased by only 2% (ie, to 88%).US determination of liver surface nodularity is an accurate method for identifying the subset of asymptomatic patients with severe liver fibrosis or cirrhosis, which indicates a worse prognosis.Cirrhosis: diagnosis by liver surface analysis with high-frequency ultrasound.To determine the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of the sonographic analysis of liver surface irregularities for the diagnosis of cirrhosis, the authors conducted a prospective and blinded study in 70 subjects with abnormal liver function tests. All patients included underwent liver biopsy within 15 days of the sonographic study. Twenty-three subjects with no signs or symptoms of liver disease were examined to assess the sonographic appearance of normal liver surface. Studies were performed with a small-parts probe, high-frequency transducer (7.5 MHz). Three basic patterns of liver surface were found: type I, normal; type II, focal abnormality; and type III, diffuse irregularity. Considering diffuse surface irregularity as an objective sonographic sign of cirrhosis, the study's sensitivity was 87.5%, specificity 81.5%, and positive and negative predictive values were 80% and 88.5%, respectively. Disease prevalence for cirrhosis was 45%. We conclude that sonographic analysis of the liver surface is a useful noninvasive test for the diagnosis of cirrhosis in the appropriate clinical setting.What is the criterion for differentiating chronic hepatitis from compensated cirrhosis? A prospective study comparing ultrasonography and percutaneous liver biopsy.The diagnosis of cirrhosis is currently based on percutaneous liver biopsy, although this procedure may give rise to false negative results. This prospective study blindly investigates the accuracy of an ultrasonographic score, derived from liver, spleen and portal vein features, in predicting the final diagnosis in 212 patients with compensated chronic liver disease undergoing percutaneous liver biopsy.Taking biopsy as the standard, the ultrasonographic score differed significantly between chronic hepatitis (39+/-33) and cirrhosis (100+/-35) (p<0.0001). Discriminant analysis with stepwise forward selection of the variables identified liver surface nodularity and portal flow velocity as independently associated with the diagnosis of cirrhosis (p<0.005), and a score based on these two variables correctly identified cirrhosis in 82.2% of cases. One or both of these abnormalities were also found in 27/32 patients who were diagnosed as having cirrhosis at ultrasound, but were not cirrhotic histologically. Eight of these 32 cases developed signs of decompensated liver disease and/or portal hypertension in the subsequent 6-month follow-up, thus supporting the diagnosis of cirrhosis.Our data suggest that ultrasound is accurate in predicting the final diagnosis in patients with compensated chronic liver disease and may identify cirrhosis even in the absence of a typical histopathological pattern. However, neither percutaneous liver biopsy nor ultrasonography can be assumed to be the definitive criterion for the diagnosis of compensated cirrhosis.Ultrasonographic diagnosis of hepatic fibrosis or cirrhosis.Evaluation of the degree of hepatic fibrosis is especially important in patients with chronic liver disease. Our aim was to study the diagnostic accuracy of abdominal ultrasonography for cirrhosis or fibrosis.Twenty-three clinical (n=12) and Doppler ultrasonic (n=11) variables were recorded in 243 patients with chronic (alcoholic and viral) liver disease under conditions close to those of clinical practice. Fibrosis was classified into six grades by two pathologists. Diagnostic accuracy was evaluated by discriminant analysis, first globally using all variables, then by stepwise analysis.A) Diagnosis of cirrhosis: 1) whole group (n=243): diagnostic accuracy was globally 84%, and 84% with two variables: spleen length, portal velocity; 2) compensated chronic liver disease (n=191): diagnostic accuracy was globally 85%, and 82% with two variables: liver surface, liver length (right kidney); 3) alcoholic compensated chronic liver disease (n=109): diagnostic accuracy was globally 86%, and 88% with two variables: spleen length, liver length (middle clavicle); 4) viral compensated chronic liver disease (n= 83): diagnostic accuracy was globally 86% and 86% with one variable: liver surface. By subtracting the proportion of patients who could not be investigated due to anatomical limitations, the highest calculated univariate diagnostic accuracy decreased by 7%. B) Diagnosis of fibrosis: diagnostic accuracy was globally 84% for extensive fibrosis.Cirrhosis can be correctly diagnosed in 82-88% of patients with chronic liver disease using a few ultrasonographic signs. However, the diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound is decreased by the anatomical limitations of this technique.Ultrasonographic scoring system score versus liver stiffness measurement in prediction of cirrhosis.We compared the cirrhosis-prediction accuracy of an ultrasonographic scoring system (USSS) combining six representative sonographic indices with that of liver stiffness measurement (LSM) by transient elastography, and prospectively investigated the correlation between the USSS score and LSM in predicting cirrhosis.Two hundred and thirty patients with chronic liver diseases (187 men, 43 women; age, 50.4±9.5 y, mean±SD) were enrolled in this prospective study. The USSS produces a combined score for nodularity of the liver surface and edge, parenchyma echogenicity, presence of right-lobe atrophy, spleen size, splenic vein diameter, and abnormality of the hepatic vein waveform. The correlations of the USSS score and LSM with that of a pathological liver biopsy (METAVIR scoring system: F0-F4) were evaluated.The mean USSS score and LSM were 7.2 and 38.0 kPa, respectively, in patients with histologically overt cirrhosis (F4, P=0.017) and 4.3 and 22.1 kPa in patients with fibrotic change without overt cirrhosis (F0-F3) (P=0.025). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves of the USSS score and LSM for F4 patients were 0.849 and 0.729, respectively. On the basis of ROC curves, criteria of USSS ≥6: LSM ≥17.4 had a sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy of 89.2%:77.6%, 69.4%:61.4%, 86.5%:83.7%, 74.6%:51.9% and 0.83:0.73, respectively, in predicting F4.The results indicate that this USSS has comparable efficacy to LSM in the diagnosis of cirrhosis.Comparison of liver histology with ultrasonography in assessing diffuse parenchymal liver disease.To establish the accuracy of ultrasonography in assessing diffuse parenchymal liver disease we performed a prospective comparative study with histology in 50 patients with a wide range of liver disease. Liver biopsy was performed within 24 h of the ultrasound examination and ultrasonography was performed by a single operator who was unaware of clinical details of the patients. Histology was reviewed blind and the degree of steatosis graded mild, moderate or severe while increased portal fibrous tissue was graded mild, moderate or established cirrhosis. Thirty-six patients had steatosis and 31 patients had increased fibrous tissue on histology. Ultrasonography correctly identified steatosis in 32/36 (89%) patients including all patients with the severe grade. Increased fibrous tissue was correctly identified in 24/31 (77%) with a sensitivity of 100% in patients with moderate fibrosis and established cirrhosis. Specificity was 93% for steatosis and 89% for increased fibrous tissue. These results show that ultrasonography can provide a non-invasive prediction of liver histology which in moderate and severe steatosis and advanced fibrosis can be both highly sensitive and specific.Ultrasound scanning in the detection of hepatic fibrosis and steatosis.Hepatic steatosis and fibrosis produce abnormal echo patterns on ultrasound scanning, but the potential of ultrasound scanning for diagnosing these conditions in routine clinical practice is uncertain. A prospective comparative study of 85 patients with histologically assessed liver conditions was performed, and specificity was assessed in 76 patients with functional bowel disease who were presumed to have normal livers. Histological examination showed steatosis ranging from mild to severe in 48 patients and fibrosis ranging from increased fibrous tissue to established cirrhosis in 35 patients. Ultrasound scanning accurately identified steatosis, recognising 45 cases (sensitivity 94%) with a specificity of 84%. Fibrosis was less reliably detected (sensitivity 57% and specificity 88%). Of the 50 patients with alcoholic liver disease, 47 (94%) yielded abnormal results on scanning. In the 76 patients with functional bowel disease there was only one false positive result, giving a specificity of 99% in this group. As hepatic steatosis is the earliest change in alcoholic liver disease and seems to be of prognostic importance for the development of cirrhosis, ultrasound scanning provides an effective screening procedure, particularly in the occult alcoholic, who often presents with non-specific gastrointestinal complaints.Hepatic vein arrival time as assessed by contrast-enhanced ultrasonography is useful for the assessment of portal hypertension in compensated cirrhosis.The measurement of the hepatic venous pressure gradient (HVPG) for the estimation of portal hypertension (PH) in cirrhosis has some limitations, including its invasiveness. Hepatic vein arrival time (HVAT), as assessed by microbubble contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS), is negatively correlated with the histological grade of liver fibrosis because of the associated hemodynamic abnormalities. Anatomical and pathophysiological changes in liver microcirculation are the initial events leading to PH. However, the direct relationship between HVAT and PH has not been evaluated. The present study measured both HVPG and HVAT in 71 consecutive patients with compensated cirrhosis and analyzed the relationship between the two parameters (i.e., the derivation set). Results were validated in 35 compensated patients with cirrhosis at another medical center (i.e., the validation set). The derivation set had HVPG and HVAT values of 11.4 ± 5.0 mmHg (mean ± standard deviation; range, 2-23) and 14.1 ± 3.4 seconds (range, 8.4-24.2), respectively; there was a statistically significant negative correlation between HVPG and HVAT (r(2) = 0.545; P < 0.001). The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) was 0.973 for clinically significant PH (CSPH; HVPG, ≥ 10 mmHg), and the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and positive and negative likelihood ratios for CSPH for an HVAT cut-off value of 14 seconds were 92.7%, 86.7%, 90.5%, 89.7%, 6.95, and 0.08, respectively. In addition, a shorter HVAT was associated with worse Child-Pugh score (P < 0.001) and esophageal varices (P = 0.018). In the validation set, there was also a significant negative correlation between HVAT and HVPG (r(2) = 0.538; P < 0.001), and AUROC = 0.953 for CSPH. HVAT was significantly correlated with PH. These results indicate that measuring HVAT is useful for the noninvasive prediction of CSPH in patients with compensated cirrhosis.Severe liver fibrosis or cirrhosis: accuracy of US for detection--analysis of 300 cases.To determine the accuracy of various ultrasonographic (US) signs for assessment of the degree of liver fibrosis, with histologic results as reference standard.Three hundred consecutive asymptomatic patients with at least 6 months of increased levels of aspartate aminotransferase and/or alanine aminotransferase underwent liver US and biopsy. The estimated pretest probability of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis was 35%. Three US parameters were investigated: liver surface nodularity, caudate lobe hypertrophy, and pattern of hepatic venous blood flow. US results were compared with histologic results obtained after liver biopsy, which constituted the reference standard for diagnosis of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis. The degree of fibrosis was graded according to METAVIR criteria, with stages 3 and 4 considered together. Data were analyzed with kappa and chi2 statistics. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative likelihood ratios, and posttest probability were calculated for each US sign.In 107 (36%) patients with severe fibrosis (n = 34) or cirrhosis (n = 73), liver surface nodularity had the highest diagnostic accuracy, with specificity of 95% and positive and negative likelihood ratios 11.6 and 0.51, respectively. When liver surface nodularity was considered alone, posttest probability of severe fibrosis or cirrhosis increased from 35% to 86%. When caudate lobe hypertrophy and hepatic venous blood flow were also taken into account, posttest probability increased by only 2% (ie, to 88%).US determination of liver surface nodularity is an accurate method for identifying the subset of asymptomatic patients with severe liver fibrosis or cirrhosis, which indicates a worse prognosis.Cirrhosis: diagnosis by liver surface analysis with high-frequency ultrasound.To determine the sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of the sonographic analysis of liver surface irregularities for the diagnosis of cirrhosis, the authors conducted a prospective and blinded study in 70 subjects with abnormal liver function tests. All patients included underwent liver biopsy within 15 days of the sonographic study. Twenty-three subjects with no signs or symptoms of liver disease were examined to assess the sonographic appearance of normal liver surface. Studies were performed with a small-parts probe, high-frequency transducer (7.5 MHz). Three basic patterns of liver surface were found: type I, normal; type II, focal abnormality; and type III, diffuse irregularity. Considering diffuse surface irregularity as an objective sonographic sign of cirrhosis, the study's sensitivity was 87.5%, specificity 81.5%, and positive and negative predictive values were 80% and 88.5%, respectively. Disease prevalence for cirrhosis was 45%. We conclude that sonographic analysis of the liver surface is a useful noninvasive test for the diagnosis of cirrhosis in the appropriate clinical setting.