Infantile flexural seborrhoeic dermatitis. Neither biotin nor essential fatty acid deficiency.The allegedly beneficial effect of biotin in the treatment of infantile 'flexural' seborrhoeic dermatitis was evaluated in a double-blind controlled study. No beneficial effect could be confirmed, and it is therefore unlikely that this disease is caused by biotin deficiency. Nor could this scaly dermatitis be ascribed to an essential fatty acid deficiency. Serum and adipose tissue fatty acids resembled each other and reflected the fatty acid composition of the diet.Oral use of biotin in seborrhoeic dermatitis of infancy: a controlled trial.A double-blind cross-over trial of biotin given by mouth in the treatment of seborrhoeic dermatitis of infancy did not show a statistically significant advantage of biotin over placebo.A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of ketoconazole 2% shampoo versus selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo in the treatment of moderate to severe dandruff.Ketoconazole is highly effective against the yeast Pityrosporum ovale, an organism believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of dandruff.Our purpose was to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of ketoconazole 2% shampoo versus selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo and placebo shampoo in patients with moderate to severe dandruff.Features assessed included adherent and loose dandruff scores, presence or absence of irritation, itching, yeast cells, and global improvement rating by the investigator.A total of 246 patients were included. Mean total adherent dandruff score declined throughout the treatment period with both ketoconazole 2% and selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoos significantly better than placebo at all visits. Ketoconazole was statistically superior to selenium sulfide at day 8 only (p = 0.0026). Both medicated shampoos were significantly better than placebo for reducing irritation and itching. Of the nine adverse experiences reported during the treatment phase, all involved patients treated with selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo.Both ketoconazole 2% shampoo and selenium sulfide 2.5% shampoo are effective in the treatment of moderate to severe dandruff; however, ketoconazole 2% shampoo appears to be better tolerated.A national double-blind clinical trial of a new corticosteroid lotion: a 12-investigator cooperative analysis.Efficacy of topical application of glucocorticosteroids compared with eosin in infants with seborrheic dermatitis.Two therapeutic regimens for seborrheic dermatitis in infancy were compared. Fifteen infants were treated with topical glucocorticosteroid (flumethasone pivalate 0.02 percent) and fifteen with aqueous solution of the staining agent eosin 2 percent. Following two days of treatment a similar degree of healing was noted in both groups, and after ten days almost complete healing of the lesions was observed in all of the infants.[Treatment of scalp dermatoses using a single dose of griseofulvin: trial of a reduced dose]."Timodine" cream in the treatment of flexural dermatoses and napkin rash.A double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study to estimate the efficacy and tolerability of a nonsteroidal cream for the treatment of cradle cap (seborrheic dermatitis).This study was a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group pilot study of efficacy and tolerability of a nonsteroidal cream (Promiseb® Topical Cream; Promius Pharma, LLC, Bridgewater, NJ) for treatment of cradle cap when applied topically twice daily for up to 14 days in 42 pediatric subjects. Both treatments were similarly effective in reducing disease severity, as measured by success with Investigator's Global Assessment scores at day 7 or end of treatment, with 96% of subjects achieving success in the nonsteroidal cream group and 92% of subjects achieving success in the placebo cream group. Both treatments resulted in significant reductions from baseline in terms of erythema, crusting, scaling, and oiliness (P<.05), with no significant difference between treatments. There was a significant difference (P=.03) between treatment groups for percent reduction in scaling at the end of treatment, with a 90% reduction in the nonsteroidal cream group compared with a 58% reduction in the placebo cream group. All subjects in both groups had an overall safety score of excellent, and there were no adverse events related to treatment for either group.