Rapid and efficient detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in respiratory and non-respiratory samples.The detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis using a new commercial real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay (Xpert™ MTB/RIF) was evaluated on 91 respiratory and 89 non-respiratory samples recovered from 132 patients suspected of tuberculosis (TB). Overall, 31 (17.2%) of the 180 samples, including 17 respiratory and 14 non-respiratory (respectively 17 and 12 PCR-positive), yielded M. tuberculosis on culture. The sensitivity and specificity of PCR were respectively 100% and 100%, and 85.7% and 97.3% for respiratory and non-respiratory samples. Although the test is validated only for respiratory samples, our findings suggest that it could be useful for the diagnosis of extra-pulmonary TB.Xpert® MTB/RIF in pleural fluid for the diagnosis of tuberculosis.An automated nucleic acid amplification assay that simultaneously identifies Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rifampicin resistance, the Xpert® MTB/RIF test, has undergone extensive evaluation in sputum samples. Our aim was to define its diagnostic accuracy when performed on pleural fluid specimens. In 67 patients with pleural effusions, of whom half had tuberculous pleuritis, Xpert yielded 15% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the detection of tuberculosis (TB). Positive Xpert results tended to be more common in patients with microbiologically confirmed TB. Due to its low sensitivity, Xpert testing of pleural fluids has a limited role in the work-up of pleural effusions. Markers to differentiate between Kaposi's sarcoma and tuberculous pleural effusions in HIV-positive patients.Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) and tuberculosis (TB) commonly cause pleural effusions in high human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) burden resource-limited countries. Differentiating between them is challenging, as pleural biopsy and TB culture are rarely available.To identify markers to differentiate between TB effusions and KS effusions in HIV-positive patients, and to compare liquid culture and Xpert MTB/RIF in pleural fluid.Fifty HIV-positive patients with pleural effusions recruited in Malawi underwent pleural ultrasound and aspiration. Fluid visual inspection, cell count, bacterial culture, glucose/protein, solid and liquid TB culture and Xpert were performed.The mean age of the patients was 32 years; 30/50 (60%) were male and 29 (58%) had cutaneous/oral KS. Thirteen (26%) pleural fluid samples were liquid culture-positive for TB, while 9/13 (69%) were Xpert-positive. Three (10.3%) KS patients had culture-positive TB effusions; 17 (58.6%) had KS effusions. The relative risk of TB in KS patients increased with limited KS, loculated fluid and low glucose. Eleven (52.3%) non-KS patients had culture-positive TB effusions associated with male sex, straw-coloured fluid and fibrin stranding on ultrasound.KS patients were most likely to have KS effusion, but TB should be considered. Most non-KS patients had TB, supporting the use of World Health Organization guidelines. Xpert identified two thirds of liquid culture-positive results.GeneXpert® MTB/RIF for rapid detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in pulmonary and extra-pulmonary samples.Evaluation of Cepheid's Xpert MTB/Rif test on pleural fluid in the diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis in a high prevalence HIV/TB setting.Diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis (TB) using routinely available diagnostic methods is challenging due to the paucibacillary nature of the disease. Histopathology and pleural tissue TB culture involves an invasive procedure which requires expertise and appropriate equipment, both often unavailable in many health units. Xpert MTB/Rif test has been widely evaluated in sputum specimens but data on its performance in pleural TB is scarce. We evaluated the accuracy of Cepheid's Xpert MTB/Rif test on pleural fluid in the diagnosis of pleural TB in Uganda.Consenting adult patients with exudative pleural effusions underwent pleural biopsy and the tissue obtained subjected to Lowenstein-Jensen and mycobacterial growth indicator tube MTB cultures and histopathology. Pleural fluid for Xpert MTB/Rif testing was also collected. Data on socio-demographic characteristics, clinical symptoms, HIV status and CD4 count were also collected. Sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values of Xpert MTB/Rif test on pleural fluid in pleural TB diagnosis were calculated using pleural tissue MTB culture and/or histopathology as the reference standard.Of the 116 participants [female 50%, mean age 34 (SD ±13], 87/116 (75%) had pleural TB confirmed on pleural tissue culture and/or histopathology. The Xpert MTB/Rif test identified 25 (28.7%) of the 87 confirmed pleural TB cases. The sensitivity and specificity of Xpert MTB/Rif test were 28.7% and 96.6% respectively while the positive and negative predictive values were 96.1% and 31.1% respectively.Xpert MTB/Rif test on pleural fluid does not accurately diagnose pleural TB and therefore cannot be used as an initial evaluation test in patients with suspected pleural TB. New, rapid and accurate tests for the diagnosis of pleural TB are still warranted.Determinants of PCR performance (Xpert MTB/RIF), including bacterial load and inhibition, for TB diagnosis using specimens from different body compartments.The determinants of Xpert MTB/RIF sensitivity, a widely used PCR test for the diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) are poorly understood. We compared culture time-to-positivity (TTP; a surrogate of bacterial load), MTB/RIF TB-specific and internal positive control (IPC)-specific C(T) values, and clinical characteristics in patients with suspected TB who provided expectorated (n = 438) or induced sputum (n = 128), tracheal aspirates (n = 71), bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (n = 152), pleural fluid (n = 76), cerebral spinal fluid (CSF; n = 152), pericardial fluid (n = 131), or urine (n = 173) specimens. Median bacterial load (TTP in days) was the strongest associate of MTB/RIF positivity in each fluid. TTP correlated with C(T) values in pulmonary specimens but not extrapulmonary specimens (Spearman's coefficient 0.5043 versus 0.1437; p = 0.030). Inhibition affected a greater proportion of pulmonary specimens than extrapulmonary specimens (IPC C(T) > 34: 6% (47/731) versus 1% (4/381; p < 0.0001). Pulmonary specimens had greater load than extrapulmonary specimens [TTPs (interquartile range) of 11 (7-16) versus 22 (18-33.5) days; p < 0.0001]. HIV-infection was associated with a decreased likelihood of MTB/RIF-positivity in pulmonary specimens but an increased likelihood in extrapulmonary specimens. Mycobacterial load, which displays significant variation across different body compartments, is the main determinant of MTB/RIF-positivity rather than PCR inhibition. MTB/RIF C(T) is a poor surrogate of load in extrapulmonary specimens.Evaluation of Xpert MTB/RIF assay for rapid molecular diagnosis of tuberculosis in a two-year period in Croatia.Mycobacterium tuberculosis remains a major global health problem and is currently killing 1.5 million people every year. One of the most important steps in tuberculosis control is the rapid and accurate laboratory diagnosis. The Xpert MTB/RIF assay is a novel molecular, easy-to-use assay, which can lead to tuberculosis identification in less than 2h. In this study, the Xpert MTB/RIF assay performance for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis was evaluated in comparison with conventional culture methods; 361 pulmonary and extrapulmonary patient samples were collected between October 2010 and October 2012 and were analyzed at the National Reference laboratory for Mycobacteria, Zagreb, Croatia. For pulmonary samples the sensitivity and specificity were 86% and 100%, while for extrapulmonary samples the sensitivity and specificity were 75% and 99%, respectively. It was concluded that Xpert MTB/RIF assay has high sensitivity and specificity for both pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens. Performance of Xpert MTB/RIF RUO assay and IS6110 real-time PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis detection in clinical samples.The Cepheid Xpert MTB/RIF research-use-only (RUO) assay and a laboratory-developed test (LDT) targeting IS6110 were evaluated and compared to mycobacterial culture as the gold standard. The performance characteristics of both molecular assays were determined by using 112 specimens from 90 patients, including 89 pulmonary specimens and 23 extrapulmonary specimens. Of the specimens tested, 37 (33%) were culture positive for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex; 29 were pulmonary, and 8 were extrapulmonary. Of these culture-positive specimens, 83% of the pulmonary specimens and 50% of the extrapulmonary specimens were smear positive. There was complete concordance between the smear-positive culture-positive specimens, independent of the anatomical site (100% sensitivity). The sensitivity of the MTB/RIF RUO assay for smear-negative specimens was 60% for pulmonary and 75% for extrapulmonary specimens, while the IS6110 LDT sensitivities were 40% and 0%, respectively. There was also complete concordance among the culture-negative specimens tested. Both assays showed 95% specificity, with four culture-negative specimens testing as positive. A review of patient records indicated that there was a high likelihood of the presence of M. tuberculosis complex DNA in the false-positive specimens. Biosafety analysis was performed and showed an acceptable reduction in organism viability using the processing methods described above. Both molecular assays are suitable for the detection of M. tuberculosis isolates in smear-positive pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens, while the sensitivity of the detection of M. tuberculosis isolates in smear-negative specimens was variable.Applicability of Xpert MTB/RIF assay for routine diagnosis of tuberculosis: a four-year single-center experience.The aim of this study is to assess the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for diagnosis of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex in clinical samples and to compare the results by reference to the diagnostic method, Bactec MGIT 960.A total of 7407 samples were included from patients not primarily suggesting pulmonary or extrapulmonary tuberculosis (TB), collected from patients required to be screened for TB and excluding TB diagnoses since it was a differential diagnosis. Also included were a total of 411 samples from patients primarily suggesting pulmonary or extrapulmonary TB.In the first group, 152 of 7407 samples yielded positive results with the Bactec MGIT 960, 131 (1.77%) were found positive with Löwenstein-Jensen medium, and 295 (3.99%) were found positive with Ziehl-Neelsen staining. In the second group, 24 (5.8%), 17 (4.1%), and 28 (6.8%) of 411 samples were found positive. Xpert MTB/RIF [27 (6.6%) of 411 samples] detected 3 additional samples as positive, and these 3 cases were clinically compatible with TB.The Xpert MTB/RIF assay shows superior performance for the diagnosis of TB. Its usefulness in culture-negative patients and the best method for integrating this diagnostic method into current tuberculosis diagnostic algorithms both need further study.Diagnostic accuracy of Xpert MTB/RIF for extrapulmonary tuberculosis specimens: establishing a laboratory testing algorithm for South Africa.South Africa implemented Xpert MTB/RIF as the initial diagnostic test for pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). Xpert MTB/RIF's accuracy for diagnosing extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) was investigated. EPTB specimens (n = 7,916) from hospitalized patients received over a 6-month period at a high-throughput TB referral laboratory in Johannesburg were investigated. Large-volume specimens were centrifuged, tissue biopsy specimens homogenized, and all specimens checked for growth of contaminating bacteria on blood agar. Contaminated samples received NALC-NaOH (N-acetyl-l-cysteine-sodium hydroxide) decontamination prior to liquid culture. Residual specimens (volumes > 1 ml) after inoculation of culture (n = 1,175) were tested using the Xpert MTB/RIF sputum protocol. Using culture as the reference, Xpert MTB/RIF's overall sensitivity was 59% (95% confidence interval [95% CI], 53% to 65%) and specificity was 92% (CI, 90% to 94%), with the highest sensitivities of 91% (95% CI, 78% to 97%) for pus, 80% (95% CI, 56% to 94%) for lymph node aspirates, and 51% (95% CI, 44% to 58%) for fluids (ascitic, 59%; pleural, 47%). A difference in sensitivities was noticed between specimens classified as having a thick (87% [95% CI, 76% to 94%]) versus clear (watery) (48% [95% CI, 36% to 61%]) appearance. This was unchanged with traces of blood (52% [95% CI, 44% to 60%]) or precentrifugation (57% [95% CI, 28% to 82%]) among clear specimens. Xpert MTB/RIF generated an additional 124 specimen results that were contaminated by Mycobacterial Growth Indicator Tubes (MGIT; 10.5%) and diagnosed rifampin (RIF) resistance earlier (9.6% [25/260]). Xpert MTB/RIF's performance on EPTB specimens provides very promising results and should be considered for incorporation into national TB guidelines. Xpert MTB/RIF is less affected by contaminating bacteria and reduces laboratory labor and diagnostic delay compared to traditional methods. Evaluation of the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis and detection of rifampin resistance in pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens.Mycobacterium tuberculosis remains one of the most significant causes of death from an infectious agent. The rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis and detection of rifampin (RIF) resistance are essential for early disease management. The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay is a novel integrated diagnostic device for the diagnosis of tuberculosis and rapid detection of RIF resistance in clinical specimens. We determined the performance of the MTB/RIF assay for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis and detection of rifampin resistance in smear-positive and smear-negative pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens obtained from possible tuberculosis patients. Two hundred fifty-three pulmonary and 176 extrapulmonary specimens obtained from 429 patients were included in the study. One hundred ten (89 culture positive and 21 culture negative for M. tuberculosis) of the 429 patients were considered to have tuberculosis. In pulmonary specimens, sensitivities were 100% (27/27) and 68.6% (24/35) for smear-positive and smear-negative specimens, respectively. It had a lower sensitivity with extrapulmonary specimens: 100% for smear-positive specimens (4/4) and 47.7% for smear-negative specimens (21/44). The test accurately detected the absence of tuberculosis in all 319 patients without tuberculosis studied. The MTB/RIF assay also detected 1 RIF-resistant specimen and 88 RIF-susceptible specimens, and the results were confirmed by drug susceptibility testing. We concluded that the MTB/RIF test is a simple method, and routine staff with minimal training can use the system. The test appeared to be as sensitive as culture with smear-positive specimens but less sensitive with smear-negative pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens that include low numbers of bacilli.Diagnosis of lymph node tuberculosis using the GeneXpert MTB/RIF in Tunisia.GeneXpert MTB/RIF is a fully-automated diagnostic molecular test which simultaneously detects tuberculosis (TB) and rifampicin (RIF) drug resistance. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the performance of the GeneXpert MTB/RIF test for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) in lymph node specimens and to show the place of Mycobacterium bovis as a major cause of TB lymphadenitis.This study was conducted simultaneously in the National Reference Laboratory for Mycobacteria of Ariana and the Central Laboratory of Sfax, from January to December 2013. In total, 174 lymph node specimens were processed simultaneously for Ziehl-Neelsen, auramine and immuno-histochemical staining. Conventional culture on both Lowenstein-Jensen and liquid medium (Bactec MGIT 960 BD system) and the new molecular-based GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay system were performed. Positive cultures were confirmed using molecular identification (Genotype MTBC Hain Lifescience).Among the 174 samples tested, the GeneXpert detected the DNA of MTBC in 134 samples (77%). Standard bacteriological assays, including AFB microscopy and culture, were positive, respectively, in 41 (23.6%) and 79 (45.4%) specimens. M. bovis was isolated in 76% of positive cultures. GeneXpert sensitivity and specificity results were assessed according to smear and culture results, clinical and histological findings. The sensitivity and specificity of the Xpert assay were 87.5% (126/144) and 73.3%, respectively.The implementation of the GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay may dramatically improve the rapid diagnosis of lymph node TB.Comparison of same day diagnostic tools including Gene Xpert and unstimulated IFN-γ for the evaluation of pleural tuberculosis: a prospective cohort study.The accuracy of currently available same-day diagnostic tools (smear microscopy and conventional nucleic acid amplification tests) for pleural tuberculosis (TB) is sub-optimal. Newer technologies may offer improved detection.Smear-microscopy, adenosine deaminase (ADA), interferon gamma (IFN-γ), and Xpert MTB/RIF [using an unprocessed (1 ml) and centrifuged (~20 ml) sample] test accuracy was evaluated in pleural fluid from 103 consecutive patients with suspected pleural TB. Culture for M.tuberculosis and/or histopathology (pleural biopsy) served as the reference standard. Patients were followed prospectively to determine their diagnostic categorisation.Of 93 evaluable participants, 40 had definite-TB (reference positive), 5 probable-TB (not definite but treated for TB) and 48 non-TB (culture and histology negative, and not treated for TB). Xpert MTB/RIF sensitivity and specificity (95% CI) was 22.5% (12.4 - 37.6) and 98% (89.2 - 99.7), respectively, and centrifugation did not improve sensitivity (23.7%). The Xpert MTB/RIF internal positive control showed no evidence of inhibition. Biomarker specific sensitivity, specificity, PPV, and NPVs were: ADA (48.85 IU/L; rule-in cut-point) 55.3% (39.8 - 69.9), 95.2% (83.9 - 98.7), 91.4 (73.4 - 95.4), 69.7% (56.7 - 80.1); ADA (30 IU/L; clinically used cut-point) 79% (63.7 - 89), 92.7% (80.6 - 97.5), 91.0 (73.4 - 95.4), 82.7% (69.3 - 90.1); and IFN-γ (107.7 pg/ml; rule-in cut-point) 92.5% (80.2 - 97.5), 95.9% (86.1 - 98.9), 94.9% (83.2 - 98.6), 93.9% (83.5 - 97.9), respectively (IFN-γ sensitivity and NPV better than Xpert [p < 0.05] and rule-in ADA [p < 0.05]).The usefulness of Xpert MTB/RIF to diagnose pleural TB is limited by its poor sensitivity. IFN-γ is an excellent rule-in test and, compared to ADA, has significantly better sensitivity and rule-out value in a TB-endemic setting.Cepheid GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis detection and rifampin resistance identification in patients with substantial clinical indications of tuberculosis and smear-negative microscopy results.The GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay was evaluated with microscopically negative and positive pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens from patients with substantial clinical indications for tuberculosis. For the pulmonary samples, the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values were 90.6%, 94.3%, 93.5%, and 91.7%, and for the extrapulmonary samples, they were 100%, 91.6%, 50%, and 100%, respectively. For microscopically negative specimens, the respective values were 86.3%, 93%, 79%, and 95.6%. The assay correctly detected rifampin resistance in all but one specimen, which harbored a mixed population. The GeneXpert assay was highly effective for tuberculosis diagnosis and identification of rifampin-resistant strains in smear-negative samples.Diagnostic performance of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for tuberculous lymphadenitis on fine needle aspirates from Ethiopia.The Xpert MTB/RIF (Xpert) test is a novel automated molecular diagnostic recently endorsed by the World Health Organization for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB). Nevertheless, performance related data from high TB prevalence regions to investigate clinically suspected TB lymphadenitis are limited. To evaluate the performance of Xpert test for direct detection of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) and rifampicin (RIF) resistance in lymph node aspirates, a cross-sectional study was conducted at four main hospitals in northern Ethiopia. Culture served as a reference standard for growth of MTBC and phenotypic and MTBDRplus drug susceptibility testing for detecting RIF resistance. Two-hundred-thirty-one fine needle aspirate (FNAs) specimens were processed simultaneously for smear, culture, and Xpert test. When compared to culture, the Xpert test correctly identified 29 out of 32 culture positive cases, 5 out of 11 contaminated cases, and 56 out of 188 culture negative cases. The overall sensitivity of the test was 93.5% [95% CI, 78.3-98.9%] and specificity 69.2% [95% CI, 66.4-70.0%]. The Xpert test identified the rpoB mutations associated with RIF resistance concordant with GenoType MTBDRplus and phenotypic drug susceptibility testing. In conclusion, the Xpert assay was found to perform well in detecting MTBC and RIF resistance in TB lymphadenitis patients. Furthermore, the test is simple and suitable to use in remote and rural areas for the diagnosis of TB lymphadenitis directly from FNAs in Ethiopia where TB/MDR-TB is rampant. Improved diagnosis of childhood tuberculous meningitis using more than one nucleic acid amplification test.Early treatment is critical to reducing tuberculous meningitis (TBM) related morbidity and mortality. Diagnosis based on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) culture is impractical due to slow turnaround times, while microscopy has poor sensitivity. Enhanced detection methods are essential to guide early treatment initiation, especially in vulnerable young children.We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the GenoType(®) MTBDRplus and Xpert(®) MTB/RIF assays on CSF collected from paediatric meningitis suspects prospectively enrolled at Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa. Fluorescent auramine-O microscopy, liquid culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, GenoType and Xpert assays were performed on all CSF samples.Of 101 meningitis suspects, 55 were diagnosed with TBM and 46 served as non-TBM controls. Using a pre-defined TBM case definition as reference standard, sensitivities and specificities were 4% and 100% for fluorescent microscopy, 22% and 100% for culture, 33% and 98% for GenoType, 26% and 100% for Xpert, 22% and 100% for microscopy and culture combined and 49% and 98% for GenoType and Xpert combined. Culture, GenoType and Xpert combined performed best, with 56% sensitivity and 98% specificity.Although commercial nucleic-acid amplification tests performed on CSF revealed incrementally improved diagnostic accuracy, providing rapid microbiological confirmation, they cannot serve as a rule-out test.Genotypic, Phenotypic and Clinical Validation of GeneXpert in Extra-Pulmonary and Pulmonary Tuberculosis in India.Newer molecular diagnostics have brought paradigm shift in early diagnosis of tuberculosis [TB]. WHO recommended use of GeneXpert MTB/RIF [Xpert] for Extra-pulmonary [EP] TB; critics have since questioned its efficiency.The present study was designed to assess the performance of GeneXpert in 761 extra-pulmonary and 384 pulmonary specimens from patients clinically suspected of TB and compare with Phenotypic, Genotypic and Composite reference standards [CRS].Comparison of GeneXpert results to CRS, demonstrated sensitivity of 100% and 90.68%, specificity of 100% and 99.62% for pulmonary and extra-pulmonary samples. On comparison with culture, sensitivity for Rifampicin [Rif] resistance detection was 87.5% and 81.82% respectively, while specificity was 100% for both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary TB. On comparison to sequencing of rpoB gene [Rif resistance determining region, RRDR], sensitivity was respectively 93.33% and 90% while specificity was 100% in both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary TB. GeneXpert assay missed 533CCG mutation in one sputum and dual mutation [517 & 519] in one pus sample, detected by sequencing. Sequencing picked dual mutation [529, 530] in a sputum sample sensitive to Rif, demonstrating, not all RRDR mutations lead to resistance.Current study reports observations in a patient care setting in a high burden region, from a large collection of pulmonary and extra-pulmonary samples and puts to rest questions regarding sensitivity, specificity, detection of infrequent mutations and mutations responsible for low-level Rif resistance by GeneXpert. Improvements in the assay could offer further improvement in sensitivity of detection in different patient samples; nevertheless it may be difficult to improve sensitivity of Rif resistance detection if only one gene is targeted. Assay specificity was high both for TB detection and Rif resistance detection. Despite a few misses, the assay offers major boost to early diagnosis of TB and MDR-TB, in difficult to diagnose pauci-bacillary TB.Rapid diagnosis of pediatric mycobacterial lymphadenitis using fine needle aspiration biopsy.Diagnosis of tuberculosis in children is challenging and fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) is used worldwide in the diagnosis of palpable masses including peripheral lymphadenopathy. Recent studies of the use of nucleic acid amplification such as the Xpert MTB/RIF test on FNAB in adult patients have shown considerable promise. Xpert MTB/RIF allows for the rapid diagnosis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and identification of rifampicin susceptibility. Studies to date have been predominantly performed in adults. This study aims to determine the accuracy of Xpert MTB/RIF for the detection of M. tuberculosis complex in FNAB from children with clinically suspected mycobacterial lymphadenitis.Prospective hospital-based study of children <13 years referred for FNAB at Tygerberg hospital and Dora Nginza hospital, South Africa, for suspected mycobacterial lymphadenitis. Aspirates were performed and the results of the Xpert MTB/RIF test were compared with liquid (mycobacterial growth indicator tube) culture and cytology.FNABs were collected from 110 children and 38 (35%) cases were excluded. Of the 72 cases included in the study, 32 were positive for M. tuberculosis complex on Xpert MTB/RIF, 36 on cytology and 25 were culture positive for M. tuberculosis complex. Compared with the combined reference standard (cytomorphology suggestive of mycobacterial disease with direct visualization of the organism and/or bacteriological culture), Xpert MTB/RIF identified 32 of 40 cases as positive with a sensitivity and a specificity of 80% and 93.8%, respectively.FNAB and Xpert MTB/RIF enable a rapid diagnosis in pediatric mycobacterial lymphadenitis, expediting appropriate treatment and potentially preventing morbidity and mortality.GeneXpert MTB/RIF Assay for the Diagnosis of Tuberculous Lymphadenitis on Concentrated Fine Needle Aspirates in High Tuberculosis Burden Settings.The diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis (TBL) remains challenging. The routinely used methods (cytology and smear microscopy) have sub-optimal sensitivity. Recently, WHO recommends GeneXpert to be used as the initial diagnostic test in patients suspected of having extra-pulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB). However, this was a conditional recommendation due to very low-quality evidence available and more studies are needed. In this study we evaluated the performance of Xpert for the diagnosis of TBL on concentrated fine needle aspirates (FNA) in Southwest Ethiopia.FNA was collected from presumptive TBL cases. Two smears were prepared from each aspirate and processed for cytology and conventional microscopy. The remaining aspirate was treated with N-acetyl-L-cysteine-NaOH and centrifuged for 15minutes at 3000g. The concentrated sediment was used for culture and Xpert test. Capilia TB-Neo test was used to differentiate M. tuberculosis complex (MTBC) from non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM). Composite bacteriological methods (culture and/or smear microscopy) were considered as a reference standard.Out of 143 enrolled suspects, 64.3% (92/143) were confirmed TBL cases by the composite reference standard (CRS). Xpert detected M. tuberculosis complex (MTBC) in 60.1% (86/143) of the presumptive TBL cases. The sensitivity of Xpert compared to CRS was 87.8% [95% CI: 81.0-94.5] and specificity 91.1% [95% CI: 82.8-99.4]. The sensitivity was 27.8% for smear microscopy and 80% for cytology compared to CRS. Cytology showed the lowest specificity (57.8%). Xpert was positive in 4 out of 45 culture- and smear-negative cases. Among 47 cytomorphologically non-TBL cases, 15 were positive on Xpert. More than half of Xpert-positive cases were in the range of very low cut-off threshold values (28<Ct<38). Resistance to rifampicin was identified in 4.7% (4/86) of Xpert-positive cases.Xpert test showed a high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis of TBL on concentrated FNA samples. In addition, Xpert offered rapid detection of rifampicin-resistant M. tuberculosis strains from lymph node aspirates.Epidemiology and diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis in a tuberculosis low-burden country.The aim of this article is to describe epidemiological and clinical data of patients with tuberculous lymphadenitis (TL) and evaluate the yield of the diagnostic techniques employed. Retrospective observational study was performed at the Vall d'Hebron University Hospital, Barcelona, Spain. All adult patients with confirmed TL (microbiologically) or probable TL (suspected by clinical presentation, cyto/histopathological features, and clinical improvement after specific treatment) diagnosed from January 2001 to December 2013 were included. One hundred twenty-two patients were included: 78 (63.9%) patients with confirmed diagnosis and 44 (36.1%) patients with probable TL. Seventy (57.4%) patients were nonnative residents. From 83 fine-needle aspiration (FNA) specimens, 54.8% (40/73) showed granulomatous inflammation, 62.5% (40/64) had positive mycobacterial culture, and 73.3% (11/15) tested positive with Xpert MTB/RIF (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA). From 62 biopsy samples, 96.8% (60/62) showed granulomatous inflammation, 64.6% (31/48) had positive mycobacterial culture, and 46.1% (6/13) tested positive with Xpert MTB/RIF. TL has increasingly been diagnosed in our setting, mostly because of cases diagnosed in nonnative residents. FNA is an easy and safe technique for the diagnosis of suspected TL, and the yield regarding mycobacterial culture seems to be similar to the obtained with biopsy. The Xpert MTB/RIF test from FNA specimens may increase the accuracy of the TL diagnosis and provides quicker results.Evaluation of Xpert MTB/RIF for Detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Cerebrospinal Fluid.Studies investigating Xpert MTB/RIF diagnostic performance on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples are lacking in resource-rich settings. Xpert MTB/RIF results for 740 CSF samples from 698 patients across England were retrospectively compared with the results of culture of the same and contemporary samples. The overall sensitivity was calculated at 55%. Effectiveness of an integrated real-time PCR method for detection of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex in smear-negative extrapulmonary samples in an area of low tuberculosis prevalence.Early extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) diagnosis is particularly difficult. Among 108 smear-negative extrapulmonary samples showing a positive culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (43 body fluids and 65 nonliquid specimens), 63 (58.3%) were positive with the Xpert MTB/RIF assay (GX). GX sensitivity was quite low for samples from sterile locations (especially for pleural fluids: 26.9%) but high for some nonliquid samples, like abscess aspirates (76.5%). In summary, GX may be a useful tool to be considered for EPTB diagnosis.Comparison of amplicor and GeneXpert MTB/RIF tests for diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis.There are no data about the comparative accuracy of commercially available nucleic acid amplification tests (GeneXpert MTB/RIF and Roche Amplicor) for the diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis (TBM). A total of 148 patients with suspected TBM were evaluated, and cultures served as the reference standard. The sensitivities and specificities (95% confidence interval [CI]) for the Amplicor and Xpert MTB/RIF tests were similar: 46 (31-60) versus 50 (33-67) and 99 (93-100) and 94 (84-99), respectively. Xpert MTB/Rif for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis--an experience from a tertiary care centre in South India.The Xpert MTB/Rif, with a detection limit of 131 CFU/ml, plays a valuable role in the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, both susceptible and resistant. This study aims at evaluating the Xpert MTB/Rif for the same, at a tertiary care centre in south India, assessing it against both culture and a composite gold standard (CGS).We tested consecutive samples from patients suspected of extrapulmonary tuberculosis with Xpert MTB/Rif, evaluated its sensitivity and specificity against solid and/or liquid culture and CGS. An individual analysis of different sample types (tissue biopsies, fluids, pus, lymph node biopsies and CSF) given an adequate sample size, against both culture and CGS, was also performed.In total, 494 samples were analysed against culture. Compared to culture, the sensitivity of Xpert MTB/Rif was 89% (95% CI 0.81-0.94) and its specificity was 74% (95% CI 0.70-0.78). When Xpert MTB/Rif was compared to the CGS, pooled sensitivity was 62% (95% CI 0.56-0.67) and specificity was 100% (95% CI 0.91-1.00).This assay performs better than the currently available conventional laboratory methods. The rapidity with which results are obtained is an added advantage, and its integration into a routine diagnostic protocol must be considered.[Experimental study of GeneXpert(®) system in the diagnosis of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis].To explore the application value of GeneXpert MTB/RIF for detection of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis and resistance to rifampin.A total of 150 samples were collected, including 33 needle aspirates from lymphoid tuberculosis, 23 needle aspirates from spinal tuberculosis, 49 from tuberculous pleural effusions, 24 from cerebrospinal fluid of tuberculous cephalomeningitis, and 21 urinary sediment samples from renal tuberculosis. Smear microscopy, mycobacterium tuberculosis culture and the MTB/RIF method were used to examine these samples and their positive rates were compared. Rifampin susceptibility tests was performed for culture-positive strains using proportion method, which was compared with the result from GeneXpert MTB/RIF method.Of the 150 cases of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis, 17 samples were smear-positive, with a sensitivity of 11.3% (17/150); 30 were culture-positive with a sensitivity of 20.0% (30/150); and 96 were positive by MTB/RIF method with a sensitivity of 64.0% (96/150). There was a significant difference between MTB/RIF method and the culture method (χ(2)=59.61, P<0.01). The differences were also significant when the MTB/RIF method was compared with the smear method (χ(2)=88.60, P<0.01) or compared with culture plus smear methods (χ(2)=4.26, P<0.05). Separately, the differences were statistically significant between GeneXpert MTB/RIF method and other 2 methods for diagnosis of lymphoid tuberculosis (n=33, χ(2)=20.56, P<0.01 vs. culture method; χ(2)=27.13, P<0.01 vs. smear results) while no difference was found between culture and smear method (χ(2)=0.67, P>0.05), spinal tuberculosis (n=23, χ(2)=12.74, P<0.01 vs. culture method; χ(2)=14.81, P< 0.01 vs. smear method), tuberculous pleurisy (n=49, χ(2)=32.34, P<0.01 vs.culture method; χ(2)=49.69, P<0.01 vs. smear method) and renal tuberculosis (n=21, χ(2)=4.20, P<0.05 vs. culture method; χ(2) =8.40, P<0.01 vs. smear results). The sensitivity for tuberculous meningitis had no difference among these 3 methods (n=24, P>0.05). Rifampicin-resistance of the strains from the 30 culture-positive cases of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis (20.0%, 6/30) exhibited agreement with GeneXpert MTB/RIF test.The simplicity and high sensitivity of GeneXpert MTB/RIF technology make it a good diagnostic test for rapid detection of extra-pulmonary tuberculosis and resistance to rifampin.Rapid Diagnosis of Pulmonary and Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis in HIV-Infected Patients. Comparison of LED Fluorescent Microscopy and the GeneXpert MTB/RIF Assay in a District Hospital in India.HIV-related tuberculosis is difficult to diagnose and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. Recently, the World Health Organization has endorsed the GeneXpert MTB/RIF (Xpert) assay for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients from developing countries, but information about the use of Xpert for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis is scarce. In this study, we compared the performance of light-emitting diode (LED) auramine fluorescent microscopy and the Xpert assay for the diagnosis of tuberculosis in HIV infected patients in a district hospital of India. Although at higher cost, Xpert outperformed LED fluorescent microscopy in all type of specimens, especially in cerebrospinal fluid where the number of positive results was increased 11 times. Pleural fluid, ascitic fluid, pus, and stool specimens also yielded positive results with the Xpert assay. When collecting two additional early-morning sputum samples, the increase of the number of positive results with the Xpert assay was lower than previously reported for HIV infected patients. Rifampicin resistance was observed in 2.2% of the cases. The results of this study show that the Xpert assay can dramatically improve the rapid diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis and other types of extrapulmonary tuberculosis of HIV infected patients.Xpert(®) MTB/RIF assay sensitivity with different methods of CSF processing for the diagnosis of TB meningitis.Comparative Study of a Real-Time PCR Assay Targeting senX3-regX3 versus Other Molecular Strategies Commonly Used in the Diagnosis of Tuberculosis.Nucleic acid amplification tests are increasingly used for the rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis. We undertook a comparative study of the efficiency and diagnostic yield of a real-time PCR senX3-regX3 based assay versus the classical IS6110 target and the new commercial methods.This single-blind prospective comparative study included 145 consecutive samples: 76 from patients with culture-confirmed tuberculosis (86.8% pulmonary and 13.2% extrapulmonary tuberculosis: 48.7% smear-positive and 51.3% smear-negative) and 69 control samples (24 from patients diagnosed with non-tuberculous mycobacteria infections and 45 from patients with suspected tuberculosis which was eventually ruled out). All samples were tested by two CE-marked assays (Xpert®MTB/RIF and AnyplexTM plus MTB/NTM) and two in-house assays targeting senX3-regX3 and the IS6110 gene.The detection limit ranged from 1.00E+01 fg for Anyplex, senX3-regX3 and IS6110 to 1.00E+04 fg for Xpert. All three Xpert, senX3-regX3 and IS6110 assays detected all 37 smear-positive cases. Conversely, Anyplex was positive in 34 (91.9%) smear-positive cases. In patients with smear-negative tuberculosis, differences were observed between the assays; Xpert detected 22 (56.41%) of the 39 smear-negative samples, Anyplex 24 (61.53%), senX3-regX3 28 (71.79%) and IS6110 35 (89.74%). Xpert and senX3-regX3 were negative in all control samples; however, the false positive rate was 8.7% and 13% for Anyplex and IS6110, respectively. The overall sensitivity was 77.6%, 85.7%, 77.3% and 94.7% and the specificity was 100%, 100%, 90.8% and 87.0% for the Xpert, senX3-regX3, Anyplex and IS6110 assays, respectively.Real-time PCR assays targeting IS6110 lack the desired specificity. The Xpert MTB/RIF and in-house senX3-regX3 assays are both sensitive and specific for the detection of MTBC in both pulmonary and extrapulmonary samples. Therefore, the real time PCR senX3-regX3 based assay could be a useful and complementary tool in the diagnosis of tuberculosis.Mycobacterium tuberculosis Complex and HIV Co-Infection among Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis Suspected Cases at the University of Gondar Hospital, Northwestern Ethiopia.Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis (EPTB) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection are interrelated as a result of immune depression. The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex isolates and the burden of HIV co-infection among EPTB suspected patients.An institution based cross-sectional study was conducted among EPTB suspected patients at the University of Gondar Hospital. Socio-demographic characteristics and other clinical data were collected using a pretested questionnaire. GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay was performed to diagnosis Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and Rifampicin resistance. All samples were also investigated by cytology and culture. The HIV statuses of all patients were screened initially by KHB, and all positive cases were further re-tested by STAT-pack. Data was analyzed using SPSS version 20 computer software and a P-value of < 0.05 was taken as statistically significant.A total of 141 extrapulmonary suspected patients were enrolled in this study. The overall prevalence of culture confirmed extrapulmonary tuberculosis infection was 29.8%, but the GeneXpert result showed a 26.2% prevalence of Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex infection. The 78.4% prevalence of extrapulmonary tuberculosis infection was found to be higher among the adult population. The prevalence of HIV infection among EPTB suspected patients was 14.1%, while it was 32.4% among GeneXpert-confirmed extrapulmonary TB cases (12/37). Tuberculosis lymphadenitis was the predominant (78.4%) type of EPTB infection followed by tuberculosis cold abscess (10.7%). Adult hood, previous history of contact with known pulmonary tuberculosis patients, and HIV co-infection showed a statistically significant association with extrapulmonary tuberculosis infection (P<0.013).The prevalence of culture confirmed-EPTB infection was high, and a higher EPTB-HIV co-infection was also observed.Xpert MTB/RIF for diagnosis of tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis in HIV-infected patients.The World Health Organization endorsed the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for the diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB), but there is limited information about the utility of this assay for the diagnosis of TB lymphadenitis. Therefore, the objective of this study was to assess the diagnostic accuracy of Xpert MTB/RIF assay in HIV-infected patients with palpable cervical lymph nodes.Prospective, diagnostic test study.Consecutive patients with cervical lymphadenopathy were prospectively enrolled between January 2011 and March 2013. Lymph node specimens were obtained through fine-needle aspiration or excisional biopsy. Mycobacterial culture was considered as the gold standard.Mycobacterium TB was cultured from 15 of 68 specimens (22.05%), and 53 specimens had negative cultures (77.94%). The sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF was 100% (95% CI, 74.65%-100%), and the specificity was 100% (95% CI, 91.58%-100%). Smear microscopy had a lower diagnostic performance.Although based on a limited sample size, our study indicates that Xpert MTB/RIF is a useful method for the diagnosis of cervical TB lymphadenitis in HIV-infected patients, regardless of the bacillary load in smear-positive samples or the CD4 T cell count. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value were similar to gold-standard culture.N/A.Tuberculous lymphadenitis in Northern Ethiopia: in a public health and microbiological perspectives.The actual burden and causative agent of tuberculous lymphadenitis (TBLN) cases is not well known due to lack of strong surveillance system and diagnostic facilities in Ethiopia. This study was conducted to determine the prevalence of TBLN, its causative agent and risk factors for acquiring this infection.A cross-sectional study was conducted from April to May 2012 at four main hospitals and one diagnostic clinic located in northern Ethiopia. Fine needle aspirates (FNAs) from TBLN suspects were taken for acid fast bacilli (AFB) microscopy, culture and molecular typing.Among 437 aspirates, culture yielded AFB in 226 (51.7%) of cases. Sixty one culture negative cases (30.5% of 200 cases) were positive by Xpert MTB/RIF test. Moreover, a rifampicin resistant AFB was detected from culture negative cases. The overall prevalence of FNAs positive TBLN cases was 65.8 %. The BacT/AlerT 3D system proved to be a more rapid method with higher recovery rate than Lowenstein-Jensen (L-J) and/or Gottsacker media (P<0.0001). Molecular typing identified all culture positive isolates as M.tuberculosis. The main risk factors for TBLN were pediatric age (OR 2.8, 95% CI, 1.09- 7.05) and cough (OR 2, 95%CI, 1.09-3.7).The results of this study revealed a high prevalence of TBLN in the study sites and that pediatric age and cough are key predictors of the disease. TBLN is an important public health problem that needs to be addressed in the area. It is important to note that MDR strains of TB could be involved and aetiological confirmation and drug sensitivity testing of TBLN isolates should be expanded. Further studies on the M.tuberculosis lineages, circulating strains and transmission dynamics, are recommended.Molecular diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis and sensitivity to rifampicin with an automated real-time method.Tuberculosis continues to be a global public health problem, the extrapulmonary form being estimated to occur in 10-20% of immunocompetent individuals, increasing in patients who are carriers of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); its diagnosis is difficult with conventional methods due to the paucibacillary nature of samples. The Xpert® MTB/RIF test represents an important development in the molecular detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and has been used with a variety of non-respiratory clinical samples. To determine the effectiveness of Xpert® MTB/RIF in the detection of M. tuberculosis and sensitivity to rifampicin in patients with suspected extrapulmonary tuberculosis attending Hospital Universitario de San Vicente Fundación in Medellín in 2013-2014. This was a descriptive, cross-sectional ambispective study of 372 consecutive samples from 301 patients with suspected extrapulmonary tuberculosis, who were subjected to bacilloscopy, followed by culture in Ogawa Kudoh and the Xpert® MTB/RIF molecular test. The most frequent base diagnosis (60%) for the 182 patients was infection with HIV. Using the culture as reference, the sensitivity and general specificity of the molecular test was 94% (95% CI: 83-100) and 97% (95% CI: 95-99), respectively; for bacilloscopy it was 38.71(95% CI: 19-57) and 100% (95% CI: 99-100), respectively. Sensitivities higher than 75% were found in analyses stratified by samples. Thirty-seven of the isolates were sensitive and one resistant to rifampicin. Xpert® MTB/RIF performed well in samples from different tissues and liquids, representing a significant advance in support of extrapulmonary tuberculosis diagnosis in terms of time and percentage positivity.Piloting Upfront Xpert MTB/RIF Testing on Various Specimens under Programmatic Conditions for Diagnosis of TB & DR-TB in Paediatric Population.India accounts for one-fifth of the global TB incidence. While the exact burden of childhood TB is not known, TB remains one of the leading causes of childhood mortality in India. Bacteriological confirmation of TB in children is challenging due to difficulty in obtaining quality specimens, in the absence of which diagnosis is largely based on clinical judgement. While testing multiple specimens can potentially contribute to higher proportion of laboratory confirmed paediatric TB cases, lack of high sensitivity tests adds to the diagnostic challenge. We describe here our experiences in piloting upfront Xpert MTB/RIF testing, for diagnosis of TB in paediatric population in respiratory and extra pulmonary specimens, as recently recommended by WHO.Xpert MTB/RIF testing was offered to all paediatric (0-14 years) presumptive TB cases (both pulmonary and extra-pulmonary) seeking care at public and private health facilities in the project areas covering 4 cities of India.Under this pilot project, 8,370 paediatric presumptive TB & presumptive DR-TB cases were tested between April and-November 2014. Overall, 9,149 specimens were tested, of which 4,445 (48.6%) were non-sputum specimens. Xpert MTB/RIF gave 9,083 (99.2%, CI 99.0-99.4) valid results. Of the 8,143 presumptive TB cases enrolled, 517 (6.3%, CI 5.8-6.9) were bacteriologically confirmed. TB detection rates were two fold higher with Xpert MTB/RIF as compared to smear microscopy. Further, a total of 60 rifampicin resistant TB cases were detected, of which 38 were detected among 512 presumptive TB cases while 22 were detected amongst 227 presumptive DR-TB cases tested under the project.Xpert MTB/RIF with advantages of quick turnaround testing-time, high proportion of interpretable results and feasibility of rapid rollout, substantially improved the diagnosis of bacteriologically confirmed TB in children, while simultaneously detecting rifampicin resistance.Rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis using Xpert MTB/RIF assay - Report from a developing country.To evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for the detection of M. tuberculosis in pulmonary and extrapulmonary specimens and to compare it with conventional techniques.During a period of 10 months from December 2012 through September 2013, two hundred and forty five clinically TB suspects were enrolled for Xpert MTB\RIF assay. The cohort comprised of 205 suspects of pulmonary TB and 40 of extrapulmonary TB (EPTB). The 40 EPTB samples included pus aspirated from different sites of the body (n=19), pleural fluid (n=11), ascitic fluid (n=7), pericardial fluid, CSF and urine one each. Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) Stained smear microscopy, culture on LJ media and Xpert MTB/RIF assay was performed on samples from these patients.M. tuberculosis (MTB) were detected by Xpert MTB/RIF test in 111 (45.3%) out of 245 samples. Of these, 85 (34.7%) were smear positive on ZN staining and 102 (41.6%) were positive on LJ cultures. Rifampicin resistance was detected in 16 (6.5%) patients. Nine out of 19 pus samples (47.3%) were positive for MTB by Gene Xpert, 03 (15.8%) on ZN staining and 04 (21%) on LJ culture. MTB could not be detected in any other extrapulmonary sample.Xpert MTB/RIF is a sensitive method for rapid diagnosis of Tuberculosis, especially in smear negative cases and in EPTB as compared to the conventional ZN staining. Among EPTB cases the highest yield of positivity was shown in Pus samples. For countries endemic for TB GeneXpert can serve as a sensitive and time saving diagnostic modality for pulmonary and EPTB.Evaluation of Xpert MTB/RIF for the Diagnosis of Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis in China.We evaluate the performance of Xpert MTB/RIF for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) in China. The performance of Xpert was evaluated compared to the composite reference standard (CRS), drug susceptibility testing (DST), and imaging examination. The overall sensitivity and specificity of Xpert were 64.1% (195/304) and 100% (24/24), respectively, using CRS as the gold standard. The sensitivity was significantly higher than that of culture for pus (P<0.05). The proportion of EPTB-positive cases diagnosed by imaging was two times more than that diagnosed using Xpert; however, 6 out of 19 cases may have been overdiagnosed by imaging. Compared to phenotypic DST, the sensitivity and specificity of Xpert were 80% (12/15) and 100% (75/75), respectively. Considering its high sensitivity and specificity, Xpert MTB/RIF may be used as a rapid initial test for EPTB diagnosis, and may also support a quicker decision on the treatment regimen. The combination of imaging and Xpert testing could provide high efficiency and accurate diagnosis of suspected EPTB.Diagnostic accuracy of quantitative PCR (Xpert MTB/RIF) for tuberculous pericarditis compared to adenosine deaminase and unstimulated interferon-γ in a high burden setting: a prospective study.Tuberculous pericarditis (TBP) is associated with high morbidity and mortality, and is an important treatable cause of heart failure in developing countries. Tuberculous aetiology of pericarditis is difficult to diagnose promptly. The utility of the new quantitative PCR test (Xpert MTB/RIF) for the diagnosis of TBP is unknown. This study sought to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of the Xpert MTB/RIF test compared to pericardial adenosine deaminase (ADA) and unstimulated interferon-gamma (uIFNγ) in suspected TBP.From October 2009 through September 2012, 151 consecutive patients with suspected TBP were enrolled at a single centre in Cape Town, South Africa. Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture and/or pericardial histology served as the reference standard for definite TBP. Receiver-operating-characteristic curve analysis was used for selection of ADA and uIFNγ cut-points.Of the participants, 49% (74/151) were classified as definite TBP, 33% (50/151) as probable TBP and 18% (27/151) as non TBP. A total of 105 (74%) participants were human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) positive. Xpert-MTB/RIF had a sensitivity and specificity (95% confidence interval (CI)) of 63.8% (52.4% to 75.1%) and 100% (85.6% to 100%), respectively. Concentration of pericardial fluid by centrifugation and using standard sample processing did not improve Xpert MTB/RIF accuracy. ADA (≥35 IU/L) and uIFNγ (≥44 pg/ml) both had a sensitivity of 95.7% (88.1% to 98.5%) and a negative likelihood ratio of 0.05 (0.02 to 0.10). However, the specificity and positive likelihood ratio of uIFNγ was higher than ADA (96.3% (81.7% to 99.3%) and 25.8 (3.6 to 183.4) versus 84% (65.4% to 93.6%) and 6.0 (3.7 to 9.8); P = 0.03) at an estimated background prevalence of TB of 30%. The sensitivity and negative predictive value of both uIFNγ and ADA were higher than Xpert-MT/RIF (P < 0.001).uIFNγ offers superior accuracy for the diagnosis of microbiologically confirmed TBP compared to the ADA assay and the Xpert MTB/RIF test.The reliability analysis of Xpert-positive result for smear-negative and culture-negative specimen collected from bone and joint tuberculosis suspects.The Xpert MTB/RIF assay (Xpert; Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) has been widely used for pulmonary and extra-pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) diagnosis. In clinical practice, specimen yielding smear-negative, culture-negative but Xpert-positive results is frequently confronted. Due to the notorious possibility of contamination that molecular tests always been thought of, Xpert-positive results without bacteriological supporting evidence arouse great confusions to clinicians.A retrospective study was performed. From April 2014 to February 2015, 852 clinical specimens were Xpert-positive. The results of Xpert assay, bacteriological and pathological examinations from either the same specimens or from the specimens collected during same clinical operations were investigated.A total of 90 specimens with Xpert-positive but smear-negative and culture-negative results were recruited, and 81 of them were pus specimens collected from Bone and Joint Tuberculosis (BJTB) patients. According to the pathological examination results, 77 of the 81 pus specimens, 8 of 9 other types of specimens were confirmed as either TB or strongly suggestive of TB; three pus specimens and one biopsy tissue were also suggested TB but with less stronger evidence; only one pus specimen was not TB suggestive.Our study demonstrated that Xpert could be trusted for BJTB diagnosis even when no supporting bacteriological evidence is available in high TB prevalence settings. Our results will alleviate the confusion among clinicians in such scenarios.Diagnostic yield of fine needle aspiration biopsy in HIV-infected adults with suspected mycobacterial lymphadenitis.Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) has been shown to be the diagnostic procedure of choice for superficial lymphadenitis in tuberculosis endemic regions.We conducted a retrospective laboratory-based study to determine the bacteriological yield of clinically suspected mycobacterial tuberculous lymphadenitis following FNAB in adults, and specifically HIV-positive patients, to determine the need for the introduction of automated nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) such as the Xpert MTB/RIF assay as the initial diagnostic modality. RESULTS. A diagnostic yield of 80% was achieved, significantly higher in HIV-positive v. HIV-negative patients (84% v. 52%, respectively; p<0.001).The results justify using automated NAATs such as the Xpert MTB/RIF assay as the initial diagnostic modality to expedite management in HIV-infected patients.Diagnostic accuracy and effectiveness of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for the diagnosis of HIV-associated lymph node tuberculosis.Xpert MTB/RIF (Xpert) is recommended for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated pulmonary tuberculosis but not extrapulmonary tuberculosis. We assessed the performance of Xpert for HIV-associated lymph node tuberculosis (LNTB), the most common type of extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Among HIV-infected adults suspected of LNTB presenting for fine needle aspirate (FNA) at a South African hospital, we assessed the diagnostic accuracy of Xpert using either FNA culture or a composite of microscopy, culture, and cytology as the reference standard, and evaluated the impact of different diagnostics on patient management. Among 344 adults with valid FNA culture and Xpert results, 84 (24 %) were positive on microscopy, 149 (43 %) on culture, 152 (53 %) on Xpert, and 181 (57 %) had a cytology result suggestive of tuberculosis. Using liquid culture as the reference standard, the specificity of a single Xpert was suboptimal (88.2 %) but the sensitivity was high [93.3 %, 95 % confidence interval (CI) 87.6-96.6] and increased with decreasing CD4 count (from 87.0 % for CD4 >250 to 98.6 % for CD4 <100 cells/mm(3)). Using a composite reference standard reduced the sensitivity to 79.2 % but increased the specificity to 98.6 %. All Xpert-positive patients initiated treatment within one day, compared to 70 % of culture-positive but Xpert-negative and 13 % of culture- and Xpert-negative but cytology-positive patients. Xpert is accurate and effective and could be endorsed as the initial diagnostic for HIV-associated LNTB.Rapid molecular detection of extrapulmonary tuberculosis by the automated GeneXpert MTB/RIF system.In total, 521 nonrespiratory specimens (91 urine, 30 gastric aspirate, 245 tissue, 113 pleural fluid, 19 cerebrospinal fluid [CSF], and 23 stool specimens) submitted to the German National Reference Laboratory for Mycobacteria (NRL) from May 2009 to August 2010 were comparatively investigated with the new molecular-based GeneXpert MTB/RIF (Xpert) assay system and conventional liquid and solid culture methods. Twenty (3.8%) of the 521 specimens gave no interpretable result. Whereas the sensitivity of the Xpert assay with tissue specimens was 69.0% (20 out of 29 culture-positive cases detected), 100% sensitivity was found with the urine and stool specimens. The combined sensitivity and specificity of the Xpert assay were calculated to be 77.3% and 98.2%, respectively.GeneXpert polymerase chain reaction for spinal tuberculosis: an accurate and rapid diagnostic test.The lack of an accurate, rapid diagnostic test for mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) is a major handicap in the management of spinal TB. GeneXpert, a new, rapid molecular diagnostic test is recommended as the first line investigation for suspected pulmonary TB in areas with a high prevalence of HIV or drug resistance, yet it has not been validated for the diagnosis of musculoskeletal TB. The aim of this study was to assess the accuracy of GeneXpert in diagnosing spinal TB. A prospective clinical study of 69 consecutive adults with suspected spinal TB was conducted at a tertiary hospital in an area with the highest incidence and prevalence of TB in the world. GeneXpert was used on tissue samples of the enrolled patients and its diagnostic accuracy compared with a reference standard of tissue in liquid culture. A total of 71 spine samples from 69 patients (two re-biopsies) were included in the study. The GeneXpert test showed a sensitivity of 95.6% and specificity of 96.2% for spinal TB. The results of the GeneXpert test were available within 48 hours compared with a median of 35 days (IQR 15 to 43) for cultures. All cases of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR TB) were diagnosed accurately with the GeneXpert test. The MDR TB rate was 5.8%.Xpert MTB/RIF for rapid diagnosis of tuberculous lymphadenitis from fine-needle-aspiration biopsy specimens.This study demonstrates the excellent diagnostic accuracy of the Xpert MTB/RIF test in patients with tuberculous lymphadenitis. The test sensitivity and specificity were 96.7% (95% confidence interval [CI], 86.6 to 100%) and 88.9% (95% CI, 69.6 to 100%), respectively, and it correctly identified 6/6 (100%) of the cytology smear-negative/culture-positive cases and 1 of 2 (50%) rifampin-resistant cases.Evaluation of molecular detection of extrapulmonary tuberculosis and resistance to rifampicin with GeneXpert® MTB/RIF.We aimed to evaluate the GeneXpert® MTB/RIF test for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary tuberculosis. The test simultaneously detects Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex and resistance to rifampicin.We analyzed 153 clinical samples collected in a tertiary hospital in Sfax, Tunisia, between 2013 and 2014. We performed the GeneXpert® test, a Ziehl-Neelsen and auramine-rhodamine staining, conventional culture on MGIT 960 and LJ media, and we tested the resistance to anti-tuberculosis drugs on MGIT 960 and LJ media for each sample. Diagnosis was based on clinical, radiological, microbiological, pathological, and therapeutic data.We considered that 59 patients out of 153 presented with tuberculosis. PCR was positive in 50 samples and all of these samples were susceptible to rifampicin. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, and negative predictive value of the GeneXpert® test were 84.7%, 96.8%, 94.3%, and 91%, respectively, compared with diagnosis. We observed a statistically significant difference between the direct test and the GeneXpert® test, and between culture and the GeneXpert® test. No statistically significant difference was observed between pathological results and the GeneXpert® test. Sensitivity of the GeneXpert® test was 87.5% in biopsies, 80% in pus and abscesses, and 66.7% in biological fluids. All strains were susceptible to rifampicin with culture and GeneXpert® test.The GeneXpert® test helped detect a higher proportion of M. tuberculosis complex. It does not replace conventional diagnostic methods but it is a useful addition to achieve better sensitivity and obtain rapid results.[Application of Gene Xpert Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA and resistance to rifampicin assay in the rapid detection of tuberculosis in children].To detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) and rifampin resistance of the clinical specimens in children by Xpert MTB DNA and resistance to rifampicin(MTB/RIF) detection system, and evaluate the application value of this method in children with tuberculosis.Data of 109 children cases of clinically suspected tuberculosis were collected (including 46 gastric lavage aspirate, 19 sputum, 10 fine needle aspiration biopsy, 4 pus, 14 cerebrospinal fluid, 11 Serous membrance fluid, 1 marrow, 3 stool, 1 urine specimens)between April 2014 and March 2015. All specimens were detected by smear fluorescence staining microscopy, MGIT 960 BACTEC liquid culture, Xpert MTB/RIF assay and T-SPOT.TB test respectively. The sensitivity and specificity of Xpert MTB/RIF assay were analyzed in those clinical specimens.The sensitivity and specificity of the Xpert MTB/RIF assay for MTB detection in childhood tuberculosis clinical specimen were 28.6% and 87.5%. The sensitivity of 65 pulmonary tuberculosis(46 gastric lavage aspirate, 19 sputum) which included gastric lavage aspirates and sputum was 33.3% and 57.1%, the specificity of the two was 100.0%. In 44 extrapulmonary tuberculosis, the sensitivity of the pus and the puncture fluid was higher and approached 100.0%. The detection rate of the cerebrospinal fluid and serous cavity effusion was very low. The sensitivity was 100.0% in smear-positive and culture-positive samples and only 30.8% to 50.0% in smear-negative and culture-positive samples. The sensitivity and specificity of Xpert MTB/RIF assay to detect rifampin resistance were 100.0%. In clinical samples, the sensitivity of Xpert MTB/RIF assay was higher than that of smear fluorescence staining microscopy, but the difference was not statistically significant (χ(2)=0, P>0.05). The result was equivalent to that of MGIT 960 BACTEC liquid culture (28.6% vs. 27.3%, χ(2)=2.50, P>0.05), and far below that of T-SPOT.TB(28.6% vs 59.7%, χ(2)=13.92, P<0.05).Xpert MTB/RIF assay did not show obvious advantage in childhood tuberculosis, especially in serous cavity effusion and cerebrospinal fluid, but the advantages of detecting tuberculosis rapidly and resistance to rifampin can provide help for the clinical diagnosis and treatment in childrenhood tuberculosis.[Rapid diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis by Xpert MTB/RIF assay].Early diagnosis of pleural tuberculosis (TB) is particularly difficult. The aim of this study was to investigate the diagnostic accuracy of the Xpert MTB/RIF (Xpert) assay using pleural biopsy and pleural fluid specimens in patients with suspected pleural TB negative for sputum acid-fast bacilli (AFB) smear.In this study, 134 sputum smear-negative suspected pleural TB patients were selected. Paired pleural fluid and pleural biopsy specimens were tested for Mycobacterium tuberculosis by standard smear-microscopy, Lowenstein-Jensen and mycobacterial growth indicator tube (MGIT) culture, and the Xpert assay. Mycobacterial culture from pleural biopsy specimens were used as a reference standard for sensitivity and specificity calculations. Detection of rifampicin resistance was compared to the MGIT method.The sensitivity of the Xpert assay using pleural biopsy specimens for the diagnosis of pleural TB was 85.5% (47/55), and the specificity was 97.2% (69/71). The sensitivity and specificity of the Xpert assay in pleural fluid were 43.6% (24/55) and 98.6% (70/71), respectively. The Xpert assay correctly identified 90.0% (10/11) of phenotypic rifampicin-resistant cases and 93.9% (31/33) of phenotypic rifampicin-susceptible cases.The Xpert assay on pleural biopsy specimens may provide an accurate diagnosis of pleural TB in patients who had a negative AFB smear.