Effects on sleep: a double-blind study comparing trimipramine to imipramine in depressed insomniac patients.Trimipramine, a sedating tricyclic antidepressant, and imipramine were compared on polysomnographic parameters during a 4-week double-blind trial in depressed patients with insomnia and anxiety. Trimipramine eliminated objective evidence of sleep disturbance. This was not the case with imipramine, although depression improved similarly in both groups. Subjects' sleep appeared unchanged or more disturbed at the end of the treatment with imipramine. For trimipramine, the major changes in sleep parameters occurred during the first week of drug administration and did not parallel the gradual changes seen in the measures of depression. Additionally, trimipramine did not suppress REM sleep even in a subgroup of six trimipramine patients who had short rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep latencies during the placebo baseline period, even though their depression was alleviated. The data demonstrate that (a) antidepressants may vary in their effects on sleep, even though they have similar effects on depression; (b) REM sleep suppression does not necessarily accompany improvement in depression; and (c) reports of improved sleep by patients undergoing antidepressant therapy may not reflect improvement on objective measures of sleep. The different sleep effects suggest the possibility of different antidepressant pathways.Trazodone for sleep disturbance after alcohol detoxification: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.Trazodone is a commonly prescribed off-label for sleep disturbance in alcohol-dependent patients, but its safety and efficacy for this indication is unknown.We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-control trial of low-dose trazodone (50 to 150 mg at bedtime) for 12 weeks among 173 alcohol detoxification patients who reported current sleep disturbance on a validated measure of sleep quality or during prior periods of abstinence. Primary outcomes were the proportion of days abstinent and drinks per drinking day over 6-months; sleep quality was also assessed.Urn randomization balanced baseline features among the 88 subjects who received trazodone and 85 who received placebo. The trazodone group experienced less improvement in the proportion of days abstinent during administration of study medication (mean change between baseline and 3 months: -0.12; 95% CI: -0.15 to -0.09), and an increase in the number of drinks per drinking day on cessation of the study medication (mean change between baseline and 6 months, 4.6; 95% CI: 2.1 to 7.1). Trazodone was associated with improved sleep quality during its administration (mean change on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index between baseline and 3 months: -3.02; 95% CI: -3.38 to -2.67), but after it was stopped sleep quality equalized with placebo.Trazodone, despite a short-term benefit on sleep quality, might impede improvements in alcohol consumption in the postdetoxification period and lead to increased drinking when stopped. Until further studies have established benefits and safety, routine initiation of trazodone for sleep disturbance cannot be recommended with confidence during the period after detoxification from alcoholism.A Phase 2 Randomized Dose-Finding Study With Esmirtazapine in Patients With Primary Insomnia.The antidepressant mirtazapine is an alternative to classical hypnotics, and this study investigated the efficacy and safety of esmirtazapine (Org 50081, the maleic acid salt of S-mirtazapine) in patients given a diagnosis of primary insomnia after acute (2-day) treatment. Patients aged 18 to 65 years with primary insomnia were randomized to receive placebo or 1.5-, 3.0-, or 4.5-mg esmirtazapine in a balanced 4-way crossover study; 2 sleep laboratory nights with polysomnography were separated by 5-day, single-blind placebo washout periods. Polysomnography-determined total sleep time (primary end point) and patient-reported total sleep time improved by at least 25 minutes with all 3 doses of esmirtazapine (P ≤ 0.001 vs placebo). Polysomnography-measured wake time after sleep onset (P ≤ 0.0001) and latency to persistent sleep also improved vs placebo (P ≤ 0.01, 3.0 and 4.5 mg). Patient-reported sleep quality improved with 3.0- and 4.5-mg esmirtazapine (P ≤ 0.01 and P ≤ 0.05, respectively, vs placebo). Morning alertness and contentment were not altered after esmirtazapine, and calmness increased with 4.5-mg esmirtazapine vs placebo. Evening questionnaires showed no difference in duration of daytime naps but reduced energy and ability to work/function after esmirtazapine treatment periods vs placebo (P < 0.05), although this effect was limited to the first night of each 2-night period. There were few adverse events, no serious adverse events, or clinically relevant treatment differences in vital signs, laboratory values, or electrocardiogram. Esmirtazapine doses of 1.5 to 4.5 mg/day significantly improved quantity and quality of sleep and were generally well tolerated, with no evidence of safety concerns or consistent pattern of residual effects. Trazodone for sleep disturbance during methadone maintenance: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial.To test whether trazodone, one of the most commonly prescribed medications for treatment of insomnia, improves subjective and/or objective sleep among methadone-maintained persons with sleep complaints, we performed a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with 6-month follow-up.From eight methadone maintenance programs in the northeastern United States, we recruited 137 persons receiving methadone for at least 1 month who reported a Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) score of six or higher. Two-night home polysomnography (PSG) was completed at baseline and 1 month later, with morning surveys and urine drug toxicologies. Interviews assessed sleep over the past 30 days at baseline and 1-, 3-, and 6-month follow-ups.Participants averaged 38 years of age, were 47% male, and had a mean PSQI total score of 12.9 (±3.1). At baseline, intervention groups did not significantly differ on 10 PSG-derived objective sleep measures and 11 self-reported measures. Over 88% (n=121) of participants completed the PSG at 1-month. Without adjusting p-values for multiple comparisons, only 1 of 21 sleep measure comparisons was statistically significant (p<.05). The effect of trazodone on mean PSQI scores during the 6-month follow-up was not statistically significant (p=.10). Trazodone neither significantly increased nor decreased illicit drug use relative to placebo.Trazodone did not improve subjective or objective sleep in methadone-maintained persons with sleep disturbance. Other pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatments should be investigated for this population with high rates of insomnia.Nocturnal melatonin secretion and sleep after doxepin administration in chronic primary insomnia.Nocturnal melatonin secretion and polysomnographic sleep patterns were investigated in ten patients with chronic primary insomnia (age 41.3 +/- 9.5 years) and in five healthy subject, (age 27.2 +/- 0.7 years) after either a single intravenous administration of 25 mg doxepin or placebo in a randomized, double blind, and cross-over setting. In the patient group a third session was performed after a three-week open oral treatment with 25 mg doxepin daily. The single-dose administration of doxepin did not affect plasma melatonin concentrations in either the patients on the healthy subjects. After three weeks of oral doxepin intake by the patients, the area under the curve of total nocturnal plasma melatonin concentration was significantly increased by 26% and the peak values were increased by 30%. Both after the single i.v. treatment as well as after long-term oral administration, doxepin also significantly improved sleep latency, total sleep time, and sleep efficiency in the insomniacs as well as the healthy subjects, whereas the nocturnal wake time was decreased. These findings indicate that this tricyclic antidepressant not only improves sleep and but also preserves the secretion of a hormone which is believed to play a special role in the circadian sleep-wake rhythm. Long-term doxepin treatment of chronic insomniac patients not only improves sleep but also restores nocturnal melatonin secretion in these patients.Efficacy and safety of doxepin 6 mg in a four-week outpatient trial of elderly adults with chronic primary insomnia.The efficacy and safety of doxepin (DXP), a histamine H(1) receptor antagonist, was evaluated in elderly adults with sleep maintenance insomnia.This was a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled outpatient trial. Elderly adults meeting DSM-IV-TR criteria for primary insomnia were randomized to four weeks of nightly treatment with either DXP 6 mg (N=130) or placebo (PBO; N=124). Efficacy was assessed using patient self-report instruments and clinician ratings. Patient-reported endpoints included subjective total sleep time (sTST), subjective wake after sleep onset (sWASO), latency to sleep onset (LSO), sleep quality, and a Patient Global Impression scale (PGI). The primary endpoint was sTST at week 1.DXP 6 mg produced significantly more sTST and less sWASO at week 1 (both p-values <0.0001) than PBO. These significant improvements versus placebo were maintained at weeks 2-4 (all p-values <0.05). There were no significant differences in LSO for DXP 6 mg versus PBO. DXP 6 mg significantly improved sleep quality (weeks 1, 3, and 4, p<0.05) and several outcome-related parameters, including several items on the PGI, the severity and improvement items of the Clinician Global Impression scale (CGI; weeks 1 and 2) and the Insomnia Severity Index (ISI; weeks 1-4), all versus PBO. There were no reports of anticholinergic effects (e.g., dry mouth) or memory impairment. The safety profile of DXP 6 mg was comparable to that of PBO.In elderly adults with insomnia, DXP 6 mg produced significant improvements in sleep maintenance, sleep duration, and sleep quality endpoints that were sustained throughout the trial. These data suggest that DXP 6 mg is effective for treating sleep maintenance insomnia and is well-tolerated in elderly adults with chronic primary insomnia.Paroxetine treatment of primary insomnia in older adults.The goal of this study was to test the efficacy of paroxetine for primary insomnia in older adults.Adults over age 55 with primary insomnia were randomly assigned to six weeks of double-blind treatment with paroxetine (N = 14) or placebo (N = 13). Outcome measures included persistence or resolution of insomnia; weekly diary measures of sleep quality, daytime alertness, and mood; and pre-/postpolysomnographic measures of sleep latency, wake time after sleep onset, and sleep efficiency.Although weekly diary-based measures showed improved subjective sleep quality, daytime alertness, and mood with paroxetine, the authors observed no effect on sleep efficiency or categorical response rates.Paroxetine appears to be ineffective for treating primary insomnia in old age.The effects of trazodone on sleep in patients treated with stimulant antidepressants.To evaluate the effects of trazodone on subjective and objective measures of sleep in depressed insomnia patients treated with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). SSRIs can exacerbate or cause new insomnia while alleviating other symptoms of depression. Trazodone has been reported to be an effective hypnotic for patients with antidepressant-associated insomnia.Twelve female patients were given either 100 mg trazodone or placebo for 7 days in a double-blind crossover design with a 7-day washout period. Polysomnographic recordings were repeated on the 3rd, 9th and 17th, 23rd nights after treatment with trazodone or placebo. Sleep was assessed by Pittsburgh sleep quality index (PSQI) at the beginning and end of the study. Psychological evaluation was done by Hamilton depression rating scale (HDRS).Trazodone significantly increased total sleep time, percentage of stages 3+4, sleep efficiency index, sleep continuity index and decreased percentage of stage 1, number of awakenings, stage shifts compared to the baseline. This improvement was also obtained after 7 days of treatment. The PSQI score was reduced to 5+/-1.6 at the end of the study. HDRS was reduced to 11.5+/-4.5 with trazodone and to 12.2+/-3 with placebo.Trazodone is effective in the treatment of antidepressant-associated insomnia.Comparative effects of nefazodone and fluoxetine on sleep in outpatients with major depressive disorder.Sleep disturbances are common in major depressive disorder. In previous open-label trials, nefazodone improved sleep continuity and increased rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, while not affecting stage 3/4 sleep or REM latency: in contrast, fluoxetine suppressed REM sleep. This study compared the objective and subjective effects of nefazodone and fluoxetine on sleep.This paper reports combined results of three identical, multisite, randomized, double-blind, 8-week, acute-phase trials comparing nefazodone (n = 64) with fluoxetine (n = 61) in outpatients with nonpsychotic major depressive disorder and insomnia. Sleep electroencephalographic (EEG) recordings were gathered at baseline and weeks 2, 4, and 8. Clinical ratings were obtained at weeks 1-4, 6, and 8.Nefazodone and fluoxetine were equally effective in reducing depressive symptoms; however, nefazodone differentially and progressively increased (while fluoxetine reduced) sleep efficiency and reduced (while fluoxetine increased) the number of awakenings in a linear fashion over the 8-week trial. Fluoxetine, but not nefazodone, prolonged REM latency and suppressed REM sleep. Nefazodone significantly increased total REM sleep time. Clinical evaluations of sleep quality were significantly improved with nefazodone compared with fluoxetine.Nefazodone and fluoxetine were equally effective antidepressants. Nefazodone was associated with normal objective, and clinician- and patient-rated assessments of sleep when compared with fluoxetine. These differential sleep EEG effects are consistent with the notion that nefazodone and fluoxetine may have somewhat different modes and spectra of action.Doxepin and cognitive behavioural therapy for insomnia in patients with Parkinson's disease -- a randomized study.Although a variety of pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic treatments are effective for insomnia in the general population, insomnia in Parkinson's disease differs in important ways and may need different treatments. No studies have conclusively demonstrated effective insomnia treatments in Parkinson's disease.We conducted a three-arm six-week randomized pilot study assessing non-pharmacologic treatment (cognitive behavioural therapy with bright light therapy) or doxepin (10 mg daily), compared to an inactive placebo in Parkinson's patients with insomnia. Sleep outcomes included insomnia scales, clinical global impression, sleep diaries and actigraphy. Secondary outcomes included motor severity, fatigue, depression and quality of life.18 patients were randomized, 6 to each group. Compared to placebo, doxepin improved the Insomnia Severity Index (-9 ± 5.4 vs. -2 ± 3.9, p = 0.03), the SCOPA-night score (-5.2 ± 1.5 vs. -2.3 ± 2.8, p = 0.049), the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index-sleep disturbances subscale (-0.5 ± 0.5 vs 0.2 ± 0.4, p = 0.02), and both patient and examiner-rated clinical global impression of change (1.7 ± 0.8 vs. 0.5 ± 0.8, p = 0.03 and 1.4 ± 0.5 vs. 0.3 ± 0.5, p = 0.003). On secondary outcomes doxepin reduced the fatigue severity scale (p = 0.02) and improved scores on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (p = 0.007). Non-pharmacological treatment reduced the Insomnia Severity Index (-7.8 ± 3.8 vs. -2.0 ± 3.9, p = 0.03), and the examiner-reported clinical global impression of change (p = 0.006), but was associated with decline in Parkinson Disease Questionnaire-39. There were no changes in other primary and secondary outcomes, including actigraphy outcomes. Adverse events were comparable in all groups.Doxepin and non-pharmacologic treatment substantially improved insomnia in Parkinson's disease. These potential benefits must be replicated in a full confirmatory randomized controlled trial.Cognitive Behavioral Insomnia Therapy for Those With Insomnia and Depression: A Randomized Controlled Clinical Trial.To compare cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I) + antidepressant medication (AD) against treatments that target solely depression or solely insomnia.A blinded, randomized split-plot experimental study.Two urban academic clinical centers.107 participants (68% female, mean age 42 ± 11) with major depressive disorder and insomnia.Randomization was to one of three groups: antidepressant (AD; escitalopram) + CBT-I (4 sessions), CBT-I + placebo pill, or AD + 4-session sleep hygiene control (SH).Subjective sleep was assessed via 2 weeks of daily sleep diaries (use of medication was covaried in all analyses); although there were no statistically significant group differences detected, all groups improved from baseline to posttreatment on subjective sleep efficiency (SE) and total wake time (TWT) and the effect sizes were large. Objective sleep was assessed via overnight polysomnographic monitoring at baseline and posttreatment; analyses revealed both CBT groups improved on TWT (p = .03), but the AD + SH group worsened. There was no statistically significant effect for PSG SE (p = .07). There was a between groups medium effect observed for the AD + SH and CBT + placebo group differences on diary TWT and both PSG variables. All groups improved significantly from baseline to posttreatment on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAMD-17); the groups did not differ.Although all groups self-reported sleeping better after treatment, only the CBT-I groups improved on objective sleep, and AD + SH's sleep worsened. This suggests that we should be treating sleep in those with depression with an effective insomnia treatment and relying on self-report obscures sleep worsening effects. All groups improved on depression, even a group with absolutely no depression-focused treatment component (CBT-I + placebo). The depression effect in CBT-I only group has been reported in other studies, suggesting that we should further investigate the antidepressant properties of CBT-I.Effects of escitalopram on sleep problems in patients with major depression or generalized anxiety disorder.Disturbed sleep is a key symptom in major depressive disorder (MDD) and generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). First-line antidepressants, including the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), may have different effects on sleep.Data from 22 randomized, controlled trials comparing escitalopram with SSRIs, SNRIs, or placebo in the treatment of adult MDD or GAD were included. Both last observation carried forward (LOCF) and repeated measurements (MMRM) were used to analyze the sleep item of the Montgomery Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) or Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale (HAM-A) after 8 weeks of treatment. Sleep-related treatment-emergent adverse events were also compared across groups.For patients with MDD (n = 5133), the treatment difference on MADRS item 4 ("reduced sleep") was significantly in favor of escitalopram versus placebo (LOCF [P = 0.0017] and MMRM [P = 0.0002]), versus SSRIs (LOCF [P = 0.0020] and MMRM [P < 0.0031]), and versus SNRIs (LOCF [P = 0.0002] and MMRM [P = 0.0352]). For the 53% of patients with MDD who suffered from sleep problems at baseline (baseline MADRS item 4 score ≥ 4), the improvement in sleep symptoms was significantly in favor of escitalopram versus placebo (LOCF [P = 0.0022] and MMRM [P < 0.0005]), versus SSRIs (LOCF [P = 0.0001] and MMRM [P = 0.0002]), and versus SNRIs (LOCF [P < 0.0067] but not MMRM [P > 0.0787]). For patients with GAD (n = 2052) the treatment difference in sleep symptoms measured by HAM-A item 4 ("insomnia") was significantly in favor of escitalopram versus placebo (LOCF [P = 0.0005] and MMRM [P < 0.0001]), but not different to paroxetine or venlafaxine. The same pattern was seen for the large proportion (67%-82%) of GAD patients reporting sleep problems at baseline (baseline HAM-A item 4 score ≥ 2). In MDD, the rate of insomnia as an adverse event after escitalopram was higher than placebo, similar to SSRIs, and lower than SNRIs.Additional research assessing the comparative effects of antidepressants with polysomnography is needed. In the interim, from a clinical perspective, escitalopram appears to be beneficial for the treatment of sleep problems in MDD and GAD.Doxepin in the treatment of primary insomnia: a placebo-controlled, double-blind, polysomnographic study.Over recent years, the use of antidepressants for the symptomatic treatment of insomnia has grown substantially, but controlled studies are still lacking. Our study is the first investigation to prove objective efficacy and tolerability of low doses of a sedating antidepressant in a randomized, double-blind, and placebo-controlled manner in patients with primary insomnia.Forty-seven drug-free patients meeting DSM-IV criteria for primary insomnia (mean +/- SD duration of complaints = 11.2+/-9.7 years) received either 25-50 mg of the tricyclic antidepressant doxepin or placebo for 4 weeks followed by 2 weeks of placebo withdrawal. Sleep was measured by polysomnography at baseline and the first night of application, at 4 weeks of treatment and the first to third night of withdrawal, and after 2 weeks of withdrawal.In the doxepin-treated patients who completed the study (N = 20, 47.6+/-11.3), medication significantly increased sleep efficiency after acute (night 1, p < or = .001) and subchronic (night 28, p < or = .05) intake compared with the patients who received placebo (N = 20, 47.4+/-16.8 years of age). Latency to sleep onset was not affected since the patients had normal baseline sleep latencies. Investigators found doxepin to cause significantly (p < or = .05) better global improvement at the first day of treatment. Patients rated sleep quality (p < or = .001) and working ability (p < or = .005) to be significantly improved by doxepin during the whole treatment period. Overall rebound in sleep parameters was not observed, but patients with severe rebound insomnia were significantly more frequent in the doxepin group (night 29, p < .01, night 30, p < or = .01; night 31, p < or = .05). No significant group differences in side effects were found, but 2 doxepin-treated patients dropped out of the study due to specific side effects (increased liver enzymes, leukopenia, and thrombopenia).The results support the effectiveness of low doses of doxepin to improve sleep and working ability in chronic primary insomniacs, although subjective effects were light to moderate, and in some patients, rebound insomnia and specific side effects have to be considered.Efficacy of agomelatine and escitalopram on depression, subjective sleep and emotional experiences in patients with major depressive disorder: a 24-wk randomized, controlled, double-blind trial.In the present randomized, controlled, double-blind trial (12 wk treatment plus double-blind extension for 12 wk), 25-50 mg/d agomelatine (n = 164) and 10-20 mg/d escitalopram (n = 160) were compared for short- and long-term efficacy, subjective sleep and tolerability. The effects of these drugs on emotional experiences were also compared in patients having completed the Oxford Questionnaire on the Emotional Side-Effects of Antidepressants (agomelatine: n = 25; escitalopram: n = 20). Agomelatine and escitalopram similarly improved depressive symptoms, with clinically relevant score changes over 12 and 24 wk and notable percentage of remitters (week 12: 60.9 and 54.4%; week 24: 69.6 and 63.1% respectively). Over the 12 and 24-wk treatment periods, the 'global satisfaction on sleep' scores increased in both treatment groups and did not differ between groups. Satisfaction with sleep-wake quality was high in both groups; the 'wellness feeling on waking' was more improved with agomelatine than with escitalopram (p = 0.02). In patients with pronounced sleep complaints, quality of sleep and feeling on waking were significantly more improved with agomelatine than with escitalopram (p = 0.016 and p = 0.009, respectively). Emotional blunting was less frequent on agomelatine than on escitalopram. Indeed, 28% of patients on agomelatine vs. 60% on escitalopram felt that their emotions lacked intensity and 16% of patients on agomelatine vs. 53% on escitalopram felt that things that they cared about before illness did not seem important any more (p = 0.024). The tolerability profile of agomelatine was found to be superior to that of escitalopram and the incidence of patients with at least one emergent adverse event leading to treatment discontinuation was lower in the agomelatine group than in the escitalopram group (5.5 vs. 10.6%). The findings suggest that agomelatine displays additional long-term clinical benefits on sleep-wake quality and emotional experiences over escitalopram in the management of depression.One gram of L-tryptophan fails to alter the time taken to fall asleep.Efficacy and Safety of Doxepin 1 mg and 3 mg in a 12-week Sleep Laboratory and Outpatient Trial of Elderly Subjects with Chronic Primary Insomnia.to evaluate the efficacy and safety of doxepin 1 mg and 3 mg in elderly subjects with chronic primary insomnia.the study was a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial. Subjects meeting DSM-IV-TR criteria for primary insomnia were randomized to 12 weeks of nightly treatment with doxepin (DXP) 1 mg (n = 77) or 3 mg (n = 82), or placebo (PBO; n = 81). Efficacy was assessed using polysomnography (PSG), patient reports, and clinician ratings. Objective efficacy data are reported for Nights (N) 1, 29, and 85; subjective efficacy data during Weeks 1, 4, and 12; and Clinical Global Impression (CGI) scale and Patient Global Impression (PGI) scale data after Weeks 2, 4, and 12 of treatment. Safety assessments were conducted throughout the study.DXP 3 mg led to significant improvement versus PBO on N1 in wake time after sleep onset (WASO; P < 0.0001; primary endpoint), total sleep time (TST; P < 0.0001), overall sleep efficiency (SE; P < 0.0001), SE in the last quarter of the night (P < 0.0001), and SE in Hour 8 (P < 0.0001). These improvements were sustained at N85 for all variables, with significance maintained for WASO, TST, overall SE, and SE in the last quarter of the night. DXP 3 mg significantly improved patient-reported latency to sleep onset (Weeks 1, 4, and 12), subjective TST (Weeks 1, 4, and 12), and sleep quality (Weeks 1, 4, and 12). Several global outcome-related variables were significantly improved, including the severity and improvement items of the CGI (Weeks 2, 4, and 12), and all 5 items of the PGI (Week 12; 4 items after Weeks 2 and 4). Significant improvements were observed for DXP 1 mg for several measures including WASO, TST, overall SE, and SE in the last quarter of the night at several time points. Rates of discontinuation were low, and the safety profiles were comparable across the 3 treatment groups. There were no significant next-day residual effects; additionally, there were no reports of memory impairment, complex sleep behaviors, anticholinergic effects, weight gain, or increased appetite.DXP 1 mg and 3 mg administered nightly to elderly chronic insomnia patients for 12 weeks resulted in significant and sustained improvements in most endpoints. These improvements were not accompanied by evidence of next-day residual sedation or other significant adverse effects. DXP also demonstrated improvements in both patient- and physician-based ratings of global insomnia outcome. The efficacy of DXP at the doses used in this study is noteworthy with respect to sleep maintenance and early morning awakenings given that these are the primary sleep complaints of the elderly. This study, the longest placebo-controlled, double-blind, polysomnographic trial of nightly pharmacotherapy for insomnia in the elderly, provides the best evidence to date of the sustained efficacy and safety of an insomnia medication in older adults.Efficacy and safety of doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg in adults with primary insomnia.To evaluate the efficacy and safety of doxepin 1, 3, and 6 mg in insomnia patients.Adults (18-64 y) with chronic primary insomnia (DSM-IV) were randomly assigned to one of four sequences of 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg of doxepin, and placebo in a crossover study. Treatment periods consisted of 2 polysomnographic assessment nights with a 5-day or 12-day drug-free interval between periods. Efficacy was assessed using polysomnography (PSG) and patient-reported measures. Safety analyses included measures of residual sedation and adverse events.Sixty-seven patients were randomized. Wake time during sleep, the a priori defined primary endpoint, was statistically significantly improved at the doxepin 3 mg and 6 mg doses versus placebo. All three doses had statistically significant improvements versus placebo for PSG-defined wake after sleep onset, total sleep time, and overall sleep efficiency (SE). SE in the final third-of-the-night also demonstrated statistically significant improvement at all doses. The doxepin 6 mg dose significantly reduced subjective latency to sleep onset. All three doxepin doses had a safety profile comparable to placebo. There were no statistically significant differences in next-day residual sedation, and sleep architecture was generally clinically preserved.In adults with primary insomnia, doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg was well-tolerated and produced improvement in objective and subjective sleep maintenance and duration endpoints that persisted into the final hour of the night. The side-effect profile was comparable to placebo, with no reported anticholinergic effects, no memory impairment, and no significant hangover/next-day residual effects. These data demonstrate that doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg is efficacious in improving the sleep of patients with chronic primary insomnia.Cognitive, psychomotor and polysomnographic effects of trazodone in primary insomniacs.Trazodone is prescribed widely as a sleep aid, although it is indicated for depression, not insomnia. Its daytime cognitive and psychomotor effects have not been investigated systematically in insomniacs. The primary goal of this study was to quantify, in primary insomniacs, the hypnotic efficacy of trazodone and subsequent daytime impairments. Sixteen primary insomniacs (mean age 44 years) participated, with insomnia confirmed by overnight polysomnography (sleep efficiency ≤ 85%). Trazodone 50 mg was administered to participants 30 min before bedtime for 7 days in a 3-week, within-subjects, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled design. Subjective effects, equilibrium (anterior/posterior body sway), short-term memory, verbal learning, simulated driving and muscle endurance were assessed the morning after days 1 and 7 of drug administration. Sleep was evaluated with overnight polysomnography and modified Multiple Sleep Latency Tests (MSLT) on days 1 and 7. Trazodone produced small but significant impairments of short-term memory, verbal learning, equilibrium and arm muscle endurance across time-points. Relative to placebo across test days, trazodone was associated with fewer night-time awakenings, minutes of Stage 1 sleep and self-reports of difficulty sleeping. On day 7 only, slow wave sleep was greater and objective measures of daytime sleepiness lower with trazodone than with placebo. Although trazodone is efficacious for sleep maintenance difficulties, its associated cognitive and motor impairments may provide a modest caveat to health-care providers.Low doses of mirtazapine or quetiapine for transient insomnia: A randomised, double-blind, cross-over, placebo-controlled trial.Low doses of the antidepressant mirtazapine or the neuroleptic quetiapine are often prescribed off-label for insomnia. However, studies on the effects on sleep and hangover effects the following day are scarce. In this randomised, double-blind, cross-over, placebo-controlled trial, the influence of 7.5 mg mirtazapine and 50 mg quetiapine on both normal sleep and sleep disturbed by acoustic stress (traffic noise) as a model for transient insomnia was assessed. Additionally, hangover effects on next-day alertness and cognitive functioning were examined. A total of 19 healthy men without sleep complaints completed three treatment sessions, each session consisting of three consecutive nights in one of the mirtazapine, quetiapine or placebo conditions. Sleep was assessed using polysomnography and the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire. Daytime sleepiness and cognitive functioning were assessed using the Leeds Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire, Karolinska Sleepiness Scale, Digit Symbol Substitution Task, Psychomotor Vigilance Task and an addition task. Under acoustic stress, both mirtazapine and quetiapine increased total sleep time by half an hour and reduced the number of awakenings by 35-40% compared to placebo. While quetiapine specifically increased the duration of non-rapid eye movement sleep, stage N2, mirtazapine mainly increased deep sleep stage N3. Subjects reported that both mirtazapine and quetiapine eased getting to sleep and improved sleep quality. Both drugs caused daytime sleepiness and lessened sustained attention. These findings support the use of low doses of mirtazapine and quetiapine for the treatment of insomnia. Further prospective studies on the long-term effects regarding effectiveness and adverse effects are needed.Efficacy and safety of doxepin 3 and 6 mg in a 35-day sleep laboratory trial in adults with chronic primary insomnia.To evaluate the efficacy and safety of doxepin (DXP) 3 mg and 6 mg in adults diagnosed with primary insomnia.The study was a randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, placebo-controlled trial. Patients meeting DSM-IV-TR criteria for primary insomnia were randomized to 35 days of nightly treatment with DXP 3 mg (n=75), DXP 6 mg (n=73), or placebo (PBO; n=73), followed by 2 nights of single-blind PBO to evaluate discontinuation (DC) effects. Efficacy was assessed using polysomnography (PSG) and patient reports. Efficacy data were examined for Night (N) 1, N15, and N29. Safety assessments were conducted throughout the study.Compared with PBO, DXP 3 and 6 mg significantly improved wake time after sleep onset (WASO) on N1 (3 mg and 6 mg; P<0.0001), N15 (3 mg P=0.0025; 6 mg P=0.0009), and N29 (3 mg P=0.0248; 6 mg P=0.0009), latency to persistent sleep (LPS) on N1 (3 mg P=0.0047; 6 mg P=0.0007), and total sleep time (TST) on N1 (3 mg and 6 mg P<0.0001), N15 (6 mg P=0.0035), and N29 (3 mg P=0.0261; 6 mg P<0.0001). In terms of early morning awakenings, DXP 3 and 6 mg demonstrated significant improvements in SE in the final quarter of the night on N1, N15, and N29, with the exception of 3 mg on N29 (P=0.0691). Rates of discontinuation were low, and the safety profiles were comparable across the 3 treatment groups. There were no significant next-day residual effects, and there were no spontaneous reports of memory impairment, complex sleep behaviors, anticholinergic effects, weight gain, or increased appetite. Additionally, there was no evidence of rebound insomnia after DXP discontinuation.Five weeks of nightly administration of DXP 3 mg and 6 mg to adults with chronic primary insomnia resulted in significant and sustained improvements in sleep maintenance and early morning awakenings (with the exception of SE in the final quarter of the night on N29 for 3 mg [P=0.0691]). These sleep improvements were not accompanied by next-day residual effects or followed by rebound insomnia or withdrawal effects upon discontinuation. These findings confirm the unique profile of sleep maintenance efficacy and safety of DXP observed in prior studies.Insomnia treatment in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces postpartum depression symptoms: a randomized clinical trial.Mental health is an important medical issue in perinatal care, and there is increasing evidence that insomnia during pregnancy is associated with postpartum depression (PPD). Therefore, the present study evaluated the effect of insomnia treatment during the third trimester of pregnancy on PPD symptoms. Fifty-four pregnant women with insomnia were randomly assigned to trazodone, diphenhydramine, or placebo treatment. Sleep quality was measured by actigraphy at baseline, and after 2 and 6 weeks of treatment. In addition, depression was assessed 2 and 6 weeks after delivery. Trazodone and diphenhydramine improved sleep profile compared to placebo after 6 weeks of treatment. Further, depressive symptoms were reduced 2 and 6 weeks after delivery in trazodone and diphenhydramine groups compared to placebo. No differences in depressive symptoms were observed between the trazodone and diphenhydramine groups. These findings indicate that insomnia treatment with trazodone or diphenhydramine during the third trimester of pregnancy may prevent PPD. Sentra PM (a Medical Food) and Trazodone in the Management of Sleep Disorders.Sleep disorders are a common and poorly treated disease state. This double blind, four arm placebo-controlled, randomized trial compared (1) low dose trazodone, (2) Sentra PM, a neurotransmitter based medical food, (3) the joint administration of trazodone and the medical food Sentra PM and (4) placebo. There were 111 subjects studied in 12 independent sites. Subjects underwent baseline screening, informed consent and an initial sleep questionnaire. After 14 days subjects underwent a second evaluation by questionnaire. At baseline and Day 14 the subjects underwent 24 hour ECG recordings that were analyzed in the frequency domain of heart rate variability. The specific high frequency parasympathetic autonomic nervous system activity was analyzed. The primary endpoints were sleep latency and parasympathetic autonomic nervous system improvement in sleeping hours. The results showed improvement in sleep latency for the Sentra PM and combination of Sentra PM and trazodone (-41 and -56 minutes P < 0.001). There was an improvement in quality of sleep for the amino acid formulation Sentra PM and the combination (3.86 and 6.48 Likert units on a 10 point scale P < 0.001). There was an activation of circadian activity percent at night in the medical food and combination groups while there was no change in parasympathetic activity in either the placebo or trazodone group. These data indicate that Sentra PM can improve the quality of sleep, the response to trazodone as a sleep medication and parasympathetic autonomic nervous system activity.The effects of fluoxetine on symptoms of insomnia in depressed patients.Fluoxetine is an efficacious, nonsedative antidepressant, but its selective efficacy on symptoms of insomnia has not been thoroughly explored. In this analysis, the effects of fluoxetine versus placebo on symptoms of insomnia were evaluated in three clinical subgroups: patients with baseline sleep disturbance, melancholia, or reduced rapid eye movement (REM) latency. Eighty-nine outpatients with major depression completed 2 nights of polysomnography (PSG) and were randomized to fluoxetine or placebo. Within each subgroup of patients, fluoxetine was statistically significantly more effective than placebo in improving non-sleep Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) items (HAM-D-17 total minus scores from Items 4, 5, and 6). Numerical improvement in HAM-D sleep total (sum of HAM-D Items 4, 5, and 6) was also seen for fluoxetine versus placebo. Fluoxetine did not exacerbate sleep disturbance either at Week 1 or at endpoint. These findings suggest that fluoxetine is an effective antidepressant in patients with baseline sleep disturbance, melancholia, and reduced REM latency.Complaints of poststroke insomnia and its treatment with mianserin.We assessed the prevalence and associations of symptoms of insomnia in patients with acute ischemic stroke, and evaluated whether mianserin as a sedative antidepressant is beneficial in the treatment of poststroke insomnia. One hundred consecutively hospitalized patients were randomized to receive 60 mg/day of mianserin (n = 51) or placebo for 1 year in a double-blind trial with a 6-month follow-up after the therapy. Symptoms of insomnia were assessed with the three insomnia-related items of the Hamilton Depression Scale; patients were defined as insomniacs if any of these items was positive. Complaints of insomnia occurred in 68% of patients on admission, and in 49% at 18 months, and they were as frequent in all subgroups of patients. From 2 months, symptoms of insomnia were associated independently with depression. Living alone before stroke (at 0 and 2 months) and age (at 12 months) were other independent predictors of insomnia. The rate of recovery as evaluated by the insomnia score was more rapid in patients on mianserin than in those on placebo. At 2 months, the scores were significantly different favoring mianserin treatment (1.3 vs. 0.8, p = 0.02). We conclude that insomnia is a common complaint after ischemic stroke. Mianserin had a beneficial influence on the recovery from symptoms of insomnia, even though the intensity of poststroke depression was low.Acute efficacy of fluoxetine versus sertraline and paroxetine in major depressive disorder including effects of baseline insomnia.This study assessed whether fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine differ in efficacy and tolerability in depressed patients and the impact of baseline insomnia on outcomes. Patients (N = 284) with DSM-IV major depressive disorder were randomly assigned in a double-blind fashion to fluoxetine, paroxetine, or sertraline for 10 to 16 weeks of treatment. Using the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression (HAM-D) sleep disturbance factor score, patients were categorized into low (<4) or high (>or=4) baseline insomnia subgroups. Changes in depression and insomnia were assessed. Safety assessments included treatment-emergent adverse events (AEs), reasons for discontinuation, and AEs leading to discontinuation. In addition, AEs were evaluated within insomnia subgroups to determine emergence of activation or sedation. Depression improvement, assessed with the HAM-D-17 total score, was similar among treatments in all patients (p = 0.365) and the high (p = 0.853) and low insomnia (p = 0.415) subgroups. Insomnia improvement, assessed with the HAM-D sleep disturbance factor score, was similar among treatments in all patients (p = 0.868) and in the high (p = 0.852) and low insomnia (p = 0.982) subgroups. Analyses revealed no significant differences between treatments in the percentages of patients with substantial worsening, any worsening, worsening at endpoint, or improvement at endpoint in the HAM-D sleep disturbance factor in either insomnia subgroup. Treatments were well tolerated in most patients. No significant differences between treatments in the incidence of AEs suggestive of activation or sedation were seen in the insomnia subgroups. These data show no significant differences in acute treatment efficacy and tolerability across fluoxetine, sertraline, and paroxetine in major depressive disorder patients. Improvement in overall depression and in associated insomnia was achieved by most patients regardless of baseline insomnia.Efficacy and safety of doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg in elderly patients with primary insomnia: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover study.Evaluate efficacy and safety of the histamine-H1 antagonist doxepin at doses of 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg in elderly adults with primary insomnia.A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover design was used in this population of elderly adults with primary insomnia (DSM-IV). Each treatment period consisted of 2 polysomnographic (PSG) assessment nights with a 5- or 12-day drug-free interval between periods. The study was conducted from September 2004 to January 2005.Sleep laboratories in 11 sleep centers in the United States.Elderly adults with primary insomnia.Doxepin 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg.Efficacy was assessed using PSG and patient-reported measures.Seventy-six patients were randomly assigned. All 3 doxepin doses produced dose-related significant improvements in PSG-determined wake time during sleep (p < .0001), wake time after sleep onset (p < .0001), total sleep time (p < .0001), and overall sleep efficiency (p < .0001) versus placebo. At the 3-mg and 6-mg doses, sleep efficiency was significantly improved during all thirds of the night (p < .05). There was a dose-related decrease in patient-reported sleep latency, with the 6-mg dose achieving statistical significance in latency to sleep onset (p = .0181). The pattern of the remaining subjective efficacy results was consistent with PSG. All 3 doxepin doses had side effect profiles comparable to placebo, with no spontaneously reported anticholinergic effects, no memory impairment, and no significant next-day residual effects.In this 2-night study of elderly adults with primary insomnia, doxepin doses of 1 mg, 3 mg, and 6 mg were well tolerated and produced significant improvement in objective and subjective sleep maintenance and duration endpoints that persisted into the final hour of the night. Positive effects on patient-reported sleep onset were observed at the highest dose. All 3 doxepin doses had a safety profile comparable to placebo. These data demonstrate that doxepin was efficacious in improving sleep in elderly adults.Trimipramine in primary insomnia: results of a polysomnographic double-blind controlled study.In recent years, sedating antidepressants have been increasingly used to treat primary insomnia. Up to now, only one open pilot study with trimipramine and one double-blind placebo-controlled study with doxepin have provided scientific support for this approach in treating primary insomnia. In order to test the hypothesis that sedating antidepressants are useful in the treatment of primary insomnia, the effect of trimipramine on objectively and subjectively measured parameters of sleep was investigated in a double-blind placebo- and lormetazepam-controlled study in a sample of 55 patients with primary insomnia attending outpatient sleep-disorder clinics. Trimipramine was selected since it has shown positive effects on sleep continuity with a lack of REM sleep suppression in studies on depressed patients and in one pilot study on patients with primary insomnia. Trimipramine at an average dose of 100 mg over a period of 4 weeks significantly enhanced sleep efficiency, but not total sleep time (which had been the primary target variable) compared to placebo as measured by polysomnography. Changes in objective sleep parameters were paralleled by changes in subjective sleep parameters. Trimipramine did not suppress REM sleep. Lormetazepam decreased wake time and sleep stage 3 and increased REM sleep compared to placebo. After switching trimipramine to placebo, sleep parameters returned to baseline. There was no evidence of any rebound effect from trimipramine. Side effects from trimipramine were only marginal. This first double-blind placebo-controlled study with trimipramine suggests its efficacy in the treatment of primary insomnia. However, due to the large intra- and interindividual variance in the parameters of interest before and during treatment a larger sample size would have been necessary to strengthen the validity of our findings.Double-blind, placebo-controlled study of the efficacy of trazodone in alcohol post-withdrawal syndrome: polysomnographic and clinical evaluations.Alcohol detoxification is accompanied by sustained difficulties in sleep initiation and maintenance. These difficulties are thought to be an important cause of relapse to alcohol use. However, the treatment of sleep problems with hypnotic drug is made difficult by cross-tolerance between benzodiazepines and alcohol. In this report, we evaluated the capacity of trazodone (TRZ), a second-generation antidepressant with anxiolytic and sedative properties, to increase the sleep efficiency in alcohol-dependent patients after detoxification. Sixteen patients completed the TRZ (n = 8) or the placebo (PL; n = 8) treatment arms. Polysomnographies were performed at baseline, after the 1st drug dose, and after 4 weeks of treatment. The main outcome was sleep efficiency. Secondary outcomes included changes in other sleep parameters, Hamilton Depression Rating and Clinical Global Impression scales. Sleep efficiency was increased in the TRZ group when it was computed after sleep onset, both immediately after 1st administration of the drug and after 4 weeks of treatment. No benefit was observed in the PL group. Sleep improvement under TRZ also included the number of awakenings, intermittent wake sleep time, and non-rapid eye movement sleep. Hamilton and Clinical Global scales were better for the TRZ group. TRZ is thus a potential option in the treatment of alcohol post-withdrawal insomnia.A comparison of nefazodone and fluoxetine on mood and on objective, subjective, and clinician-rated measures of sleep in depressed patients: a double-blind, 8-week clinical trial.Previous small trials have suggested that nefazodone does not suppress rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep or increase REM latency in depressed patients, in contrast to fluoxetine. The effects of nefazodone and fluoxetine on sleep architecture and on clinician- and patient-rated sleep measures were directly compared in this 8-week, multicenter, double-blind, randomized, parallel-group study.Forty-four outpatients with moderate to severe, nonpsychotic major depressive disorder (DSM-III-R) and insomnia were randomly assigned to receive nefazodone (Days 1-7, 200 mg/day; Days 8-56, 400 mg/day) or fluoxetine (Days 1-56, 20 mg/day). Sleep measures were obtained at baseline, while patients were unmedicated, and at Weeks 2, 4, and 8 of treatment.In 43 evaluable patients (23 nefazodone, 20 fluoxetine), nefazodone and fluoxetine demonstrated similar antidepressant efficacy. All significant values were p < .05. Fluoxetine significantly decreased sleep efficiency and REM sleep and increased number of awakenings, Stage 1 sleep, and REM latency compared with baseline. In contrast, nefazodone significantly decreased percentage of awake and movement time and did not alter sleep efficiency or number of awakenings, Stage 1 or REM sleep, or REM latency compared with baseline. Nefazodone was associated with significantly less change from baseline for sleep efficiency, number of awakenings, percentage of awake and movement time, percentage of REM and Stage 1 sleep, and REM latency compared with fluoxetine. Both fluoxetine- and nefazodone-treated patients also showed significant improvement in some clinician- and patient-rated sleep disturbance scores, but nefazodone-treated patients improved to a significantly greater extent than fluoxetine-treated patients in most measures.While nefazodone and fluoxetine showed equivalent antidepressant efficacy, more objective, subjective, and clinician-rated measures of sleep disturbance were improved during treatment with nefazodone than with fluoxetine. These results suggest that antidepressant effects of medications can occur independently of drug-induced changes in objective, subjective, and clinician-rated measures of sleep. Further studies, including parallel placebo-controlled comparisons with nefazodone, are needed to further test this hypothesis.