Cardiac testing for coronary artery disease in potential kidney transplant recipients Kidney Transplantation Pancreas Transplantation kidney pancreas transplant graft Kidney Failure Kidney Failure Chronic chronic kidney chronic renal endstage kidney endstage renal end stage kidney end stage renal ESRD ESKD ESRF ESKF Renal Dialysis dialysis hemodialysis haemodialysis hemodiafilt haemodiafilt hemofilt haemofilt PD CAPD CCPD APD C onary Disease C onary Artery Disease C onary Stenosis c onary arter stenos c onary stenos c onary atheroscleros c onary arterioscleros c onary adj disease CAD Echocardiography echocardiogr echo Dipyridamole Diagnostic Use Dobutamine Diagnostic Use Adenosine Diagnostic Use Imaging Three Dimensional Tomography Emission Co uted Tomography X ray Co uted SPECT Thallium Radioisotopes Diagnostic Use Nucleosides Technetium Tc m Sestamibi Diagnostic Use sestamibi cardiolite dipyridamole persantin scan stud thallium scan stud electron beam tomograph EBT co ut tomograph ct scan cat scan Magnetic Resonance Imaging Magnetic Resonance Angiography Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging Echo Planar Imaging echo planar echoplanar C onary Angiography Angiography MRI magnetic resonance MRA angiogr c onary catheteriation CA CC Flu oscopy flu oscopy Angiography Digital Subtraction Subtraction Technique digital subtraction Troponin Diagnostic Use calcium sc Clinical Enzyme Tests cardiac enzyme Perfusion Imaging perfusion imaging perfusion stud perfusion scintigra Exercise Test Radionuclide Ventriculography Physical Exertion stress test exercise ventriculogra treadmill bicycle Risk Assessment risk stratification risk alg ithm Carotid Arteries Ultrasonography Carotid Arteries us carotid ultrasound ultrasonogra Carotid Arteries Tunica Intima Tunica Media carotid media intima thickness carotid intima media thickness [Diagnostic value of myocardial thallium stress scintigraphy in the detection of coronary artery disease in patients undergoing chronic hemodialysis].Atherosclerotic heart disease is the leading cause of death in patients with end stage renal disease, but its non invasive detection remains difficult because of a low efficacy of exercise testing. The aim of the study was to evaluate diagnostic accuracy of thallium myocardial imaging after dipyridamole combined with exercise. Forty two chronic dialysis patients (34 men, 8 women) aged 55 +/- 11 years (range: 36 to 75) without symptom of angina nor myocardial infarction were studied. In each patient, an echocardiography, a myocardial scintigraphy with dipyridamole combined with symptom-limited exercise, and coronarography were performed. A coronary heart disease was diagnosed by coronarography in 10 patients (4.5 and 1 respectively with 1, 2 and 3 vessels diseased). Echocardiography detected a left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) in 26 patients and a regional asynergia in 14 patients. A positive scintigraphy was present in 11 patients. Three false-positive and 2 false-negative on scintigraphy were noted. Sensibility, specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value were respectively evaluated at 80, 73, 73 and 93%. All the five patients with either false-positive or false-negative scintigraphy exhibited a LVH. CONCLUSION. In chronic dialysis patients, coronary heart disease may be detected by thallium myocardial imaging after dipyridamole combined with exercise.