Urinary biomarkers for the non-invasive diagnosis of endometriosis biomarker marker Lab at y Test growth fact scatter fact cytokine hepatocyte growth fact FGF fibroblast growth fact PDGF platelet derived growth fact EGF epidermal growth fact IGF I insulin like growth fact IGF TGF a transf ming growth fact alfa TGFa TGF b transf ming growth fact beta TGFb EGFR epidermal growth fact recept VEGF vascular endothelial growth fact Luteinizing H mone bl Blood leptin Progesterone bl Blood Proteolytic enzyme matrix metalloproteinase matrix metalloproteinase matrix metalloproteinase matrix metalloproteinase matrix metalloproteinase MMP TIMP tissue inhibit of metalloproteinase tissue inhibit of metalloproteinase Glycoproteins Ca Ca cancer antigen Ca Ca cancer antigen PP PP serum placental protein Follistatin Osteopontin intercellular adhesion molecule selectins soluble intercellular adhesion Soluble adhesion molecule sICAM sVCAM sEcadherin soluble E cadherin sEselectin soluble E selectin t ly hocytes natural killer t cells Immune cells alteration T helper T supress T helper T supress ratio Total co lement level Autoantibodies Antibodies Antiphospholipid Anti endometrial Antiphospholipid hla antigens hla a antigen hla a antigen HLA human leucocyte antigen Anti laminin Anti thyroid Anti Thomsen Friedenreich antigen Anti transferrin Anti LDL Anti HSG Heremans Schmidt glycoprotein interleukin MCP I monocyte chemoattractant protein I MIF migration inhibit y fact TNF a tumour necrosis fact alfa Fas lig Endometrial marker CAMs cell adhesion molecule Integrins Integrin Selectin Cadherin Aromatase P estrogen recept progesterone recept MTMMP cyr Cysteine Rich Protein cysteine rich heparin binding protein ANXA ANXA Annexin Annexin PGP PGP protein gene product serum marker neural marker cell surface marker inflammat y marker microarray microRNA proteomic genomic endometri biops Follistatin Vascular Endothelial Growth Fact A Vitamin D Binding Protein Cytokines interleukins interleukin interleukin interleukin interleukin interleukin Epidermal Growth Fact Fibroblast Growth Fact s Platelet Derived Growth Fact Keratin Clinical Lab at y Techniques Luteinizing H mone LH cytokeratin VDBP vitamin D binding protein urinary peptide VDBP Cr urinary VDBP c rected f creatinine expression urinary marker Endometriosis Diagnosis Endometriosis Endometrio animals humans animals Urine, peritoneal fluid and omental fat proteomes of reproductive age women: Endometriosis-related changes and associations with endocrine disrupting chemicals.Endometriosis, ectopic growth of the uterine lining (endometrium), which affects 6-11% of reproductive age women, is associated with pelvic pain and infertility. We investigated the peritoneal fluid (PF), urine and omental fat (OF) proteomes of women with endometriosis vs. individuals with no surgically visualized endometriosis. All participants were enrolled in the NICHD-funded ENDO Study. A two-step proteomic study was performed. The first, a broad survey, employed a semi-quantitative gel LC-mass spectrometry (MS) workflow: SDS PAGE fractionation, trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS. The results showed sample integrity but failed to detect any differences between women with and without endometriosis. The second step was a quantitative analysis of OF samples. We employed another sample set (n=30) from women ± disease and isobaric mass-tag (iTRAQ) chemistry to label peptides and 2D LC-MS/MS for protein identification and quantification. Three proteins-matrix metalloproteinase-9, neutrophil elastase, and FAM49B-were significantly lower in abundance in samples from women with endometriosis. Interestingly, neutrophil elastase and FAM49B levels were associated with higher levels of a subset of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) that were previously measured in the same samples. The results of these experiments showed the feasibility of associating endometriosis with changes in the OF protein repertoire and EDC levels.Endometriosis, pathological growth of the uterine lining, is associated with significant morbidities, including pain and infertility. However, the causes of this common condition are poorly understood. This study determined whether endometriosis was associated with changes in the protein composition of peritoneal fluid, urine and/or omental fat. A protein of unknown function (FAM49B) and two proteinases (metalloproteinase-9, neutrophil elastase) were down regulated in OF samples from women with versus without endometriosis. These findings suggested proteinase imbalances at sites that were distant from the endometriotic lesions. Additionally, FAM49B and neutrophil elastase levels were associated with higher levels of a subset of environmental chemicals that were quantified in the same samples, suggesting other possible associations. Thus, this work generated hypotheses that will be tested in further studies.